
<a id="PREFACE">PREFACE</a></h2>
<p class="v1">
<span class="dropcap">S</span>ATAN’S DIARY,” Leonid Andreyev’s
    last work, was completed
    by the great Russian a few days before he died in Finland, in
    September, 1919. But a few years ago the most popular and
    successful of Russian writers, Andreyev died almost
    penniless, a sad, tragic figure, disillusioned,
    broken-hearted over the tragedy of Russia.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    A year ago Leonid Andreyev wrote me that he was eager to come
    to America, to study this country and familiarize Americans
    with the fate of his unfortunate countrymen. I arranged for
    his visit to this country and informed him of this by cable.
    But on the very day I sent my cable the sad news came from
    Finland announcing that Leonid Andreyev died of heart
    failure.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    In “Satan’s Diary” Andreyev summed up his boundless
    disillusionment in an absorbing satire on human life.
    Fearlessly and mercilessly he hurled the falsehoods and
    hypocrisies into the face of life. He portrayed Satan coming
    to this earth to amuse himself and play. Having assumed the
    form of an American multi-millionaire, Satan set out on a
    tour through Europe in quest of amusement and adventure.
    Before him passed various forms of spurious virtues,
    hypocrisies,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_vi">vi</a></span>

    the ruthless cruelty of man and
    the often deceptive innocence of woman. Within a short
    time Satan finds himself outwitted, deceived, relieved of
    his millions, mocked, humiliated, beaten by man in his own
    devilish devices.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The story of Andreyev’s beginning as a writer is best told in
    his autobiography which he gave me in 1908.</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="v-indent">
      “I was born,” he said, “in Oryol, in 1871, and studied there
      at the gymnasium. I studied poorly; while in the seventh
      class I was for a whole year known as the worst student, and
      my mark for conduct was never higher than 4, sometimes 3. The
      most pleasant time I spent at school, which I recall to this
      day with pleasure, was recess time between lessons, and also
      the rare occasions when I was sent out from the classroom....
      The sunbeams, the free sunbeams, which penetrated some cleft
      and which played with the dust in the hallway—all this was so
      mysterious, so interesting, so full of a peculiar, hidden
      meaning.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
      “When I studied at the gymnasium my father, an engineer,
      died. As a university student I was in dire need. During my
      first course in St. Petersburg I even starved—not so much out
      of real necessity as because of my youth, inexperience, and
      my inability to utilize the unnecessary parts of my costume.
      I am to this day ashamed to think that I went two days
      without food at a time when I had two or three pairs of
      trousers and two overcoats which I could have sold.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_vii">vii</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
      “It was then that I wrote my first story—about a starving
      student. I cried when I wrote it, and the editor, who
      returned my manuscript, laughed. That story of mine remained
      unpublished.... In 1894, in January, I made an unsuccessful
      attempt to kill myself by shooting. As a result of this
      unsuccessful attempt I was forced by the authorities into
      religious penitence, and I contracted heart trouble, though
      not of a serious nature, yet very annoying. During this time
      I made one or two unsuccessful attempts at writing; I devoted
      myself with greater pleasure and success to painting, which I
      loved from childhood on. I made portraits to order at 3 and 5
      rubles a piece.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
      “In 1897 I received my diploma and became an assistant
      attorney, but I was at the very outset sidetracked. I was
      offered a position on <cite>The Courier</cite>, for which I
      was to report court proceedings. I did not succeed in getting
      any practice as a lawyer. I had only one case and lost it at
      every point.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
      “In 1898 I wrote my first story—for the Easter number—and
      since that time I have devoted myself exclusively to
      literature. Maxim Gorky helped me considerably in my literary
      work by his always practical advice and suggestions.”</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="v-indent">
    Andreyev’s first steps in literature, his first short
    stories, attracted but little attention at the time of their
    appearance. It was only when Countess Tolstoy, the wife of
    Leo Tolstoy, in a letter to the <cite>Novoye Vremya</cite>,
    came out in “defense of artistic purity and moral power in
    contemporary

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_viii">viii</a></span>

    literature,” declaring that
    Russian society, instead of buying, reading and making
    famous the works of the Andreyevs, should “rise against
    such filth with indignation,” that almost everybody who
    knew how to read in Russia turned to the little volume of
    the young writer.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    In her attack upon Andreyev, Countess Tolstoy said as
    follows:</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="v-indent">
      “The poor new writers, like Andreyev, succeeded only in
      concentrating their attention on the filthy point of human
      degradation and uttered a cry to the undeveloped,
      half-intelligent reading public, inviting them to see and to
      examine the decomposed corpse of human degradation and to
      close their eyes to God’s wonderful, vast world, with the
      beauties of nature, with the majesty of art, with the lofty
      yearnings of the human soul, with the religious and moral
      struggles and the great ideals of goodness—even with the
      downfall, misfortunes and weaknesses of such people as
      Dostoyevsky depicted.... In describing all these every true
      artist should illumine clearly before humanity not the side
      of filth and vice, but should struggle against them by
      illumining the highest ideals of good, truth, and the triumph
      over evil, weakness, and the vices of mankind.... I should
      like to cry out loudly to the whole world in order to help
      those unfortunate people whose wings, given to each of them
      for high flights toward the understanding of the spiritual
      light, beauty, kindness, and God, are clipped by these
      Andreyevs.”</p>
</blockquote>
<p><span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_ix">ix</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    This letter of Countess Tolstoy called forth a storm of
    protest in the Russian press, and, strange to say, the
    representatives of the fair sex were among the warmest
    defenders of the young author. Answering the attack, many
    women, in their letters to the press, pointed out that the
    author of “Anna Karenina” had been abused in almost the same
    manner for his “Kreutzer Sonata,” and that Tolstoy himself
    had been accused of exerting just such an influence as the
    Countess attributed to Andreyev over the youth of Russia.
    Since the publication of Countess Tolstoy’s condemnation,
    Andreyev has produced a series of masterpieces, such as “The
    Life of Father Vassily,” a powerful psychological study; “Red
    Laughter,” a war story, “written with the blood of Russia;”
    “The Life of Man,” a striking morality presentation in five
    acts; “Anathema,” his greatest drama; and “The Seven Who Were
    Hanged,” in which the horrors of Russian life under the Tsar
    were delineated with such beautiful simplicity and power that
    Turgenev, or Tolstoy himself, would have signed his name to
    this masterpiece.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Thus the first accusations against Andreyev were disarmed by
    his artistic productions, permeated with sincere, profound
    love for all that is pure in life. Dostoyevsky and Maupassant
    depicted more subjects, such as that treated in “The Abyss,”
    than Andreyev. But with them these stories are lost in the
    great mass of their other works, while in Andreyev, who at
    that time had

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_x">x</a></span>

    as yet produced but a few short
    stories, works like “The Abyss” stood out in bold relief.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I recall my first meeting with Leonid Andreyev in 1908, two
    weeks after my visit to Count Leo Tolstoy at Yasnaya Polyana.
    At that time he had already become the most popular Russian
    writer, his popularity having overshadowed even that of Maxim
    Gorky.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    As I drove from Terioki to Andreyev’s house, along the
    dust-covered road, the stern and taciturn little Finnish
    driver suddenly broke the silence by saying to me in broken
    Russian:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Andreyev is a good writer.... Although he is a Russian, he
    is a very good man. He is building a beautiful house here in
    Finland, and he gives employment to many of our people.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We were soon at the gate of Andreyev’s beautiful villa—a
    fantastic structure, weird-looking, original in design,
    something like the conception of the architect in the “Life
    of Man.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “My son is out rowing with his wife in the Gulf of Finland,”
    Andreyev’s mother told me. “They will be back in half an
    hour.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    As I waited I watched the seething activity everywhere on
    Andreyev’s estate. In Yasnaya Polyana, the home of Count
    Tolstoy, everything seemed long established, fixed,
    well-regulated, serenely beautiful. Andreyev’s estate was
    astir with vigorous life. Young, strong men were building the
    House of Man. More than thirty of them were working on the
    roof and in the yard, and a little distance away, in the
    meadows, young women and girls, bright-eyed and red faced,
    were

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_xi">xi</a></span>

    haying. Youth, strength, vigor
    everywhere, and above all the ringing laughter of little
    children at play. I could see from the window the “Black
    Little River,” which sparkled in the sun hundreds of feet
    below. The constant noise of the workmen’s axes and
    hammers was so loud that I did not notice when Leonid
    Andreyev entered the room where I was waiting for him.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Pardon my manner of dressing,” he said, as we shook hands.
    “In the summer I lead a lazy life, and do not write a line. I
    am afraid I am forgetting even to sign my name.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I had seen numerous photographs of Leonid Andreyev, but he
    did not look like any of them. Instead of a pale-faced,
    sickly-looking young man, there stood before me a strong,
    handsome, well-built man, with wonderful eyes. He wore a
    grayish blouse, black, wide pantaloons up to
    his knees, and no shoes or stockings.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We soon spoke of Russian literature at the time, particularly
    of the drama.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “We have no real drama in Russia,” said Andreyev. “Russia has
    not yet produced anything that could justly be called a great
    drama. Perhaps ‘The Storm,’ by Ostrovsky, is the only Russian
    play that may be classed as a drama. Tolstoy’s plays cannot
    be placed in this category. Of the later writers, Anton
    Chekhov came nearest to giving real dramas to Russia, but,
    unfortunately, he was taken from us in the prime of his
    life.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What do you consider your own ‘Life of Man’ and ‘To the
    Stars’?” I asked.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_xii">xii</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “They are not dramas; they are merely presentations in so
    many acts,” answered Andreyev, and, after some hesitation,
    added: “I have not written any dramas, but it is possible
    that I will write one.” At this point Andreyev’s wife came
    in, dressed in a Russian blouse. The conversation turned to
    America, and to the treatment accorded to Maxim Gorky in New
    York.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “When I was a child I loved America,” remarked Andreyev.
    “Perhaps Cooper and Mayne Reid, my favorite authors in my
    childhood days, were responsible for this. I was always
    planning to run away to America. I am anxious even now to
    visit America, but I am afraid—I may get as bad a reception
    as my friend Gorky got.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He laughed as he glanced at his wife. After a brief pause, he
    said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The most remarkable thing about the Gorky incident is that
    while in his stories and articles about America Gorky wrote
    nothing but the very worst that could be said about that
    country he never told me anything but the very best about
    America. Some day he will probably describe his impressions
    of America as he related them to me.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    It was a very warm day. The sun was burning mercilessly in
    the large room. Mme. Andreyev suggested that it would be more
    pleasant to go down to a shady place near the Black Little
    River.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    On the way down the hill Andreyev inquired about Tolstoy’s
    health and was eager to know his views on contemporary
    matters.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_xiii">xiii</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “If Tolstoy were young now he would have been with us,” he
    said.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We stepped into a boat, Mme. Andreyev took up the oars and
    began to row. We resumed our conversation.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The decadent movement in Russian literature,” said Andreyev,
    “started to make itself felt about ten or fifteen years ago.
    At first it was looked upon as mere child’s play, as a
    curiosity. Now it is regarded more seriously. Although I do
    not belong to that school, I do not consider it worthless.
    The fault with it is that it has but few talented people in
    its ranks, and these few direct the criticism of the decadent
    school. They are the writers and also the critics. And they
    praise whatever they write. Of the younger men, Alexander
    Blok is perhaps the most gifted. But in Russia our clothes
    change quickly nowadays, and it is hard to tell what the
    future will tell us—in our literature and our life.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “How do I picture to myself this future?” continued Andreyev,
    in answer to a question of mine. “I cannot know even the fate
    and future of my own child; how can I foretell the future of
    such a great country as Russia? But I believe that the
    Russian people have a great future before them—in life and in
    literature—for they are a great people, rich in talents, kind
    and freedom-loving. Savage as yet, it is true, very ignorant,
    but on the whole they do not differ so much from other
    European nations.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Suddenly the author of “Red Laughter” looked upon me
    intently, and asked: “How is it that the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_xiv">xiv</a></span>

    European and the American
    press has ceased to interest itself in our struggle for
    emancipation? Is it possible that the reaction in Russia
    appeals to them more than our people’s yearnings for
    freedom, simply because the reaction happens to be
    stronger at the present time? In that event, they are
    probably sympathizing with the Shah of Persia! Russia
    to-day is a lunatic asylum. The people who are hanged are
    not the people who should be hanged. Everywhere else
    honest people are at large and only criminals are in
    prison. In Russia the honest people are in prison and the
    criminals are at large. The Russian Government is composed
    of a band of criminals, and Nicholas II is not the
    greatest of them. There are still greater ones. I do not
    hold that the Russian Government alone is guilty of these
    horrors. The European nations and the Americans are just
    as much to blame, for they look on in silence while the
    most despicable crimes are committed. The murderer usually
    has at least courage, while he who looks on silently when
    murder is committed is a contemptible weakling. England
    and France, who have become so friendly to our Government,
    are surely watching with compassion the poor Shah, who
    hangs the constitutional leaders. Perhaps I do not know
    international law. Perhaps I am not speaking as a
    practical man. One nation must not interfere with the
    internal affairs of another nation. But why do they
    interfere with our movement for freedom? France helped the
    Russian Government in its war against the people by giving
    money to Russia. Germany also

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_xv">xv</a></span>

    helped—secretly. In
    well-regulated countries each individual must behave
    decently. When a man murders, robs, dishonors women he is
    thrown into prison. But when the Russian Government is
    murdering helpless men and women and children the other
    Governments look on indifferently. And yet they speak of
    God. If this had happened in the Middle Ages a crusade
    would have been started by civilized peoples who would
    have marched to Russia to free the women and the children
    from the claws of the Government.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Andreyev became silent. His wife kept rowing for some time
    slowly, without saying a word. We soon reached the shore and
    returned silently to the house. That was twelve years ago.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I met him several times after that. The last time I visited
    him in Petrograd during the July riots in 1917.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="v-indent">
    A literary friend thus describes the funeral of Leonid
    Andreyev, which gives a picture of the tragedy of Russia:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “In the morning a decision had to be reached as to the day of
    the funeral. It was necessary to see to the purchase and the
    delivery of the coffin from Viborg, and to undertake all
    those unavoidable, hard duties which are so painful to the
    family.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It appeared that the Russian exiles living in our village
    had no permits from the Finnish Government to go to Viborg,
    nor the money for that expense. It further appeared that the
    family of Leonid Andreyev had left at their disposal only

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_xvi">xvi</a></span>

    one hundred marks (about 6
    dollars), which the doctor who had come from the station
    after Andreyev’s death declined to take from the widow for
    his visit.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “This was all the family possessed. It was necessary to
    charge a Russian exile living in a neighboring village, who
    had a pass for Viborg, with the sad commission of finding
    among some wealthy people in Viborg who had known Andreyev
    the means required for the funeral.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “On the following day mass was read. Floral tributes and
    wreaths from Viborg, with black inscriptions made hastily in
    ink on white ribbons, began to arrive. They were all from
    private individuals. The local refugees brought garlands of
    autumn foliage, bouquets of late flowers. Their children laid
    their carefully woven, simple and touching little childish
    wreaths at the foot of the coffin. Leonid Andreyev’s widow
    did not wish to inter the body in foreign soil and it was
    decided, temporarily, until burial in native ground, to leave
    his body in the little mortuary in the park on the estate of
    a local woman landowner.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The day of the funeral was not widely known. The need for
    special permits to travel deprived many of the opportunity to
    attend. In this way it happened that only a very small group
    of people followed the body from the house to the mortuary.
    None of his close friends was there. They, like his brothers,
    sister, one of his sons, were in Russia. Neighbors, refugees,
    acquaintances of the last two years with whom his exile had
    accidentally thrown him into contact, people who

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_xvii">xvii</a></span>

    had no connection with
    Russian literature,—almost all alien in spirit—such was
    the little group of Russians that followed the coffin of
    Leonid Andreyev to its temporary resting place.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It was a tragic funeral, this funeral in exile, of a writer
    who is so dearly loved by the whole intellectual class of
    Russia; whom the younger generation of Russia acclaimed with
    such enthusiasm.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Meanwhile he rests in a foreign land, waiting—waiting for
    Free Russia to demand back his ashes, and pay tribute to his
    genius.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Among his last notes, breathing deep anguish and despair,
    found on his desk, were the following lines:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Revolution is just as unsatisfactory a means of settling
    disputes as is war. If it be impossible to vanquish a hostile
    idea except by smashing the skull in which it is contained;
    if it be impossible to appease a hostile heart except by
    piercing it with a bayonet, then, of course, fight....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Leonid Andreyev died of a broken heart. But the spirit of his
    genius is deathless.</p>
<p class="right">
<span class="smcap">Herman Bernstein.</span></p>
<p>
<em>New York, September.</em>
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_xviii">xviii</a>
<a id="Page_xix">xix</a></span></p>
<hr class="blank"/>
<p class="xxl center v2">
<em>Satan’s Diary</em></p>
<p><span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_xx">xx</a>
<a id="Page_1">1</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<h2>
<a id="SATANS_DIARY">SATAN’S DIARY</a></h2>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      January 18.<br/>
      On board the <em>Atlantic</em>.</p></div>
<p class="v1">
<span class="dropcap">T</span>his is exactly the tenth day
    since I have become human and
    am leading this earthly life.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    My loneliness is very great. I am not in need of friends, but
    I must speak of Myself and I have no one to speak to.
    Thoughts alone are not sufficient, and they will not become
    quite clear, precise and exact until I express them in words.
    It is necessary to arrange them in a row, like soldiers or
    telephone poles, to lay them out like a railway track, to
    throw across bridges and viaducts, to construct barrows and
    enclosures, to indicate stations in certain places—and only
    then will everything become clear. This laborious engineering
    work, I think, they call logic and consistency, and is
    essential to those who desire to be wise. It is not essential
    to all others. They may wander about as they please.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The work is slow, difficult and repulsive for one

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_2">2</a></span>

    who is accustomed to—I do not
    know what to call it—to embracing all in one breath and
    expressing all in a single breath. It is not in vain that
    men respect their thinkers so much, and it is not in vain
    that these unfortunate thinkers, if they are honest and
    conscientious in this process of construction, as ordinary
    engineers, end in insane asylums. I am but a few days on
    this earth and more than once have the yellow walls of the
    insane asylum and its luring open door flashed before my
    eyes.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yes, it is extremely difficult and irritates one’s “nerves.”
    I have just now wasted so much of the ship’s fine stationery
    to express a little ordinary thought on the inadequacy of
    man’s words and logic. What will it be necessary to waste to
    give expression to the great and the unusual? I want to warn
    you, my earthly reader, at the very outset, not to gape in
    astonishment. The <em>extraordinary cannot be expressed</em>
    in the language of your grumbling. If you do not believe me,
    go to the nearest insane asylum and listen to the inmates:
    they have all realized <em>Something</em> and wanted to give
    expression to it. And now you can hear the roar and rumble of
    these wrecked engines, their wheels revolving and hissing in
    the air, and you can see with what difficulty they manage to
    hold intact the rapidly dissolving features of their
    astonished faces!

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_3">3</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I see you are all ready to ply me with questions, now that
    you learned that I am Satan in human form: it is so
    fascinating! Whence did I come? What are the ways of Hell? Is
    there immortality there, and, also, what is the price of coal
    at the stock exchange of Hell? Unfortunately, my dear reader,
    despite my desire to the contrary, if I had such a desire, I
    am powerless to satisfy your very proper curiosity. I could
    have composed for your benefit one of those funny little
    stories about horny and hairy devils, which appeal so much to
    your meagre imagination, but you have had enough of them
    already and I do not want to lie so rudely and ungracefully.
    I will lie to you elsewhere, when you least expect it, and
    that will be far more interesting for both of us.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And the truth—how am I to tell it when even my Name cannot be
    expressed in your tongue? You have called me Satan and I
    accept the name, just as I would have accepted any other: Be
    it so—I am Satan. But my real name sounds quite different,
    quite different! It has an extraordinary sound and try as I
    may I cannot force it into your narrow ear without tearing it
    open together with your brain: Be it so—I am Satan. And
    nothing more.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And you yourself are to blame for this, my friend: why is
    there so little understanding in

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_4">4</a></span>

    your reason? Your reason is like
    a beggar’s sack, containing only crusts of stale bread,
    while it is necessary to have something more than bread.
    You have but two conceptions of existence: life and death.
    How, then, can I reveal to you the <em>third</em>? All
    your existence is an absurdity only because you do not
    have this <em>third conception</em>. And where can I get
    it for you? To-day I am human, even as you. In my skull is
    your brain. In my mouth are your cubic words, jostling one
    another about with their sharp corners, and I cannot tell
    you of the Extraordinary.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    If I were to tell you that there are no devils I would lie.
    But if I say that such creatures do exist I also deceive you.
    You see how difficult it is, how absurd, my friend!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I can also tell you but little that you would understand of
    how I assumed the human form, with which I began my earthly
    life ten days ago. First of all, forget about your favorite,
    hairy, horny, winged devils, who breathe fire, transform
    fragments of earthenware into gold and change old men into
    fascinating youths, and having done all this and prattled
    much nonsense, they disappear suddenly through a wall.
    Remember: when <em>we</em> want to visit your earth
    <em>we</em> must always become human. Why this is so you will
    learn after your death. Meanwhile remember: I am a
    human

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_5">5</a></span>

    being now like yourself. There is
    not the foul smell of a goat about me but the fragrance of
    perfume, and you need not fear to shake My hand lest I may
    scratch you with my nails: I manicure them just as you do.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But how did it all happen? Very simply. When I first
    conceived the desire to visit this earth I selected as the
    most satisfactory lodging a 38-year-old American billionaire,
    Mr. Henry Wondergood. I killed him at night,—of course, not
    in the presence of witnesses. But you cannot bring me to
    court despite this confession, because the American is ALIVE,
    and we both greet you with one respectful bow: I and
    Wondergood. He simply rented his empty place to me. You
    understand? And not all of it either, the devil take him!
    And, to my great regret I can <em>return</em> only through
    the same door which leads you too to liberty: through death.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    This is the most important thing. You may understand
    something of what I may have to say later on, although to
    speak to you of such matters in your language is like trying
    to conceal a mountain in a vest pocket or to empty Niagara
    with a thimble. Imagine, for example, that you, my dear King
    of Nature, should want to come closer to the ants, and that
    by some miracle you became a real little ant,—then you may
    have some

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_6">6</a></span>

    conception of that gulf which
    separates Me now from what I was. No, still more! Imagine
    that you were a sound and have become a mere symbol—a
    musical mark on paper.... No, still worse!—No comparisons
    can make clear to you that terrible gulf whose bottom even
    I do not see as yet. Or, perhaps, there is no bottom there
    at all.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Think of it: for two days, after leaving New York, I suffered
    from seasickness! This sounds queer to you, who are
    accustomed to wallow in your own dirt? Well, I—I have also
    wallowed in it but it was not queer at all. I only smiled
    once in thinking that <em>it</em> was not I, but Wondergood,
    and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Roll on, Wondergood, roll on!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    There is another question to which you probably want an
    answer: Why did I come to this earth and accept such an
    unprofitable exchange: to be transformed from Satan, “the
    mighty, immortal chieftain and ruler” into you? I am tired of
    seeking words that cannot be found. I will answer you in
    English, French, Italian or German—languages we both
    understand well. I have grown lonesome in Hell and I have
    come upon the earth to lie and play.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    You know what ennui is. And as for falsehood, you know it
    well too. And as for <em>play</em> —you can judge it to a
    certain extent by your own theaters

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_7">7</a></span>

    and celebrated actors. Perhaps
    you yourself are playing a little rôle in Parliament, at
    home, or in your church. If you are, you may understand
    something of the <em>satisfaction</em> of play. And, if in
    addition, you are familiar with the multiplication table,
    then multiply the delight and joy of play into any
    considerable figure and you will get an idea of My
    enjoyment, of My play. No, imagine that you are an ocean
    wave, which plays eternally and lives only in play—take
    this wave, for example, which I see outside the porthole
    now and which wants to lift our “Atlantic”...but, here I
    am again seeking words and comparisons!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I simply want to play. At present I am still an unknown
    actor, a modest débutante, but I hope to become no less a
    celebrity than your own Garrick or Aldrich, after I have
    played what I please. I am proud, selfish and even, if you
    please, vain and boastful. You know what vanity is, when you
    crave the praise and plaudits even of a fool? Then I
    entertain the brazen idea that I am a genius. Satan is known
    for his brazenness. And so, imagine, that I have grown weary
    of Hell where all these hairy and horny rogues play and lie
    no worse than I do, and that I am no longer satisfied with
    the laurels of Hell, in which I but perceive no small measure
    of base flattery and downright stupidity. But I have heard of
    you,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_8">8</a></span>

    my earthly friend; I have heard
    that you are wise, tolerably honest, properly incredulous,
    responsive to the problems of eternal art and that you
    yourself play and lie so badly that you might appreciate
    the playing of others: not in vain have you so many
    <em>great actors</em>. And so I have come. You
    understand?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    My stage is the earth and the nearest scene for which I am
    now bound is Rome, the Eternal City, as it is called here, in
    your profound conception of eternity and other simple
    matters. I have not yet selected my company (would you not
    like to join it?). But I believe that <em>Fate</em> and
    <em>Chance</em>, to whom I am now subservient, like all your
    earthly things, will realize my unselfish motives and will
    send me worthy partners. Old Europe is so rich in talents! I
    believe that I shall find a keen and appreciative audience in
    Europe, too. I confess that I first thought of going to the
    East, which some of my compatriots made their scene of
    activity some time ago with no small measure of success, but
    the East is too credulous and is inclined too much to poison
    and the ballet. Its gods are ludicrous. The East still reeks
    too much of hairy animals. Its lights and shadows are
    barbarously crude and too bright to make it worth while for a
    refined artist as I am to go into that crowded, foul circus
    tent. Ah, my friend, I am so vain that I

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_9">9</a></span>

    even begin this Diary not without
    the secret intention of impressing you with my modesty in
    the rôle of <em>seeker</em> of words and comparisons. I
    hope you will not take advantage of my frankness and cease
    believing me.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Are there any other questions? Of the play itself I have no
    clear idea yet. It will be composed by the same impresario
    who will assemble the actors—<em>Fate</em>. My modest rôle,
    as a beginning, will be that of a man who so loves his fellow
    beings that he is willing to give them everything, his soul
    and his money. Of course, you have not forgotten that I am a
    billionaire? I have three billion dollars. Sufficient—is it
    not?—for one spectacular performance. One more detail before
    I conclude this page.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I have with me, sharing my fate, a certain Irwin Toppi, my
    secretary,—a most worthy person in his black frock coat and
    silk top hat, his long nose resembling an unripened pear and
    his smoothly shaven, pastor-like face. I would not be
    surprised to find a prayer book in his pocket. My Toppi came
    upon this earth from <em>there</em>, i.e. from Hell and by
    the same means as mine: he, too, assumed the human form and,
    it seems, quite successfully—the rogue is entirely immune
    from seasickness. However to be seasick one must have some
    brains and my Toppi is unusually stupid—even

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_10">10</a></span>

    for this earth. Besides,
    he is impolite and ventures to offer advice. I am rather
    sorry that out of our entire wealth of material I did not
    select some one better, but I was impressed by his honesty
    and partial familiarity with the earth: it seemed more
    pleasant to enter upon this little jaunt with an
    experienced comrade. Quite a long time ago he once before
    assumed the human form and was so taken by religious
    sentiments that—think of it!—he entered a Franciscan
    monastery, lived there to a ripe old age and died
    peacefully under the name of Brother Vincent. His ashes
    became the object of veneration for believers—not a bad
    career for a fool of a devil. No sooner did he enter upon
    this trip with Me than he began to sniff about for
    incense—an incurable habit! You will probably like him.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And now enough. Get thee hence, my friend. I wish to be
    alone. Your shallow reflection upon this wall wears upon me.
    I wish to be alone or only with this Wondergood who has
    leased his abode to Me and seems to have gotten the best of
    Me somehow or other. The sea is calm. I am no longer
    nauseated but I am afraid of something. I am afraid! I fear
    this darkness which they call night and descends upon the
    ocean: here, in the cabin there is still some light, but
    there, on deck, there is terrible darkness, and My eyes
    are

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_11">11</a></span>

    quite helpless. These silly
    reflectors—they are worthless. They are able to reflect
    things by day but in the darkness they lose even this
    miserable power. Of course I shall get used to the
    darkness. I have already grown used to many things. But
    just now I am ill at ease and it is horrible to think that
    the mere turn of a key obsesses me with this blind ever
    present darkness. Whence does it come?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And how brave men are with their dim reflectors: they see
    nothing and simply say: it is dark here, we must make a
    light! Then they themselves put it out and go to sleep. I
    regard these braves with a kind of cold wonder and I am
    seized with admiration. Or must one possess a great mind to
    appreciate horror, like Mine? You are not such a coward,
    Wondergood. You always bore the reputation of being a
    hardened man and a man of experience!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    There is one moment in the process of my assumption of the
    human form that I cannot recollect without horror. That was
    when for the first time I heard the beating of My heart. This
    regular, loud, metronome-like sound, which speaks as much of
    death as of life, filled me with the hitherto inexperienced
    sensation of horror. Men are always quarrelling about
    accounts, but how can they carry in their breasts
    <em>this</em> counting machine,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_12">12</a></span>

    registering with the
    speed of a magician the fleeting seconds of life?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    At first I wanted to shout and to run back <em>below</em>,
    before I could grow accustomed to life, but here I looked at
    Toppi: this new-born fool was calmly brushing his top hat
    with the sleeve of his frock coat. I broke out into laughter
    and cried:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Toppi, the brush!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We both brushed ourselves while the counting machine in my
    breast was computing the seconds and, it seemed to me, adding
    on a few for good measure. Finally, hearing its brazen
    beating, I thought I might not have time enough to finish my
    toillette. I have been in a great hurry for some time. Just
    what it was I would not be able to complete I did not know,
    but for two days I was in a mad rush to eat and drink and
    even sleep: the counting machine was beating away while I lay
    in slumber!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But I never rush now. I know that I will manage to get
    through and my moments seem inexhaustible. But the little
    machine keeps on beating just the same, like a drunken
    soldier at a drum. And how about the very moments it is using
    up now. Are they to be counted as equal to the great ones?
    Then I say it is all a fraud and I protest as a honest
    citizen of the United States and as a merchant.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_13">13</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I do not feel well. Yet I would not repulse even a friend at
    this moment. Ah! In all the universe I am alone!</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      February 7, 1914.<br/>
      Rome, Hotel “Internationale.”</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am driven mad whenever I am compelled to seize the club of
    a policeman to bring order in my brain: facts, to the right!
    thoughts, to the left! moods, to the rear—clear the road for
    His Highness, Conscience, which barely moves about upon its
    stilts. I am compelled to do this: otherwise there would be a
    riot, an abrecadebra, chaos. And so I call you to order,
    gentleman—facts and lady-thoughts. I begin.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Night. Darkness. The air is balmy. There is a pleasant
    fragrance. Toppi is enchanted. We are in Italy. Our speeding
    train is approaching Rome. We are enjoying our soft couches
    when, suddenly, crash! Everything flies to the devil: the
    train has gone out of its mind. It is wrecked. I confess
    without shame that I am not very brave, that I was seized
    with terror and seemed to have lost consciousness. The lights
    were extinguished and with much labor I crawled out of the
    corner into which I had been hurled. I seemed to have
    forgotten the exit. There were only walls and corners. I felt
    something stinging and beating

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_14">14</a></span>

    at Me, and all about nothing
    but darkness. Suddenly I felt a body beneath my feet. I
    stepped right upon the face. Only afterwards did I
    discover that the body was that of George, my lackey,
    killed outright. I shouted and my obliging Toppi came to
    my aid: he seized me by the arm and led me to an open
    window, as both exits had been barricaded by fragments of
    the car and baggage. I leaped out, but Toppi lingered
    behind. My knees were trembling. I was groaning but still
    he failed to appear. I shouted. Suddenly he reappeared at
    the window and shouted back:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What are you crying about? I am looking for our hats and
    your portfolio.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    A few moments later he returned and handed me my hat. He
    himself had his silk top hat on and carried the portfolio. I
    shook with laughter and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Young man, you have forgotten the umbrella!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But the old buffoon has no sense of humor. He replied
    seriously:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I do not carry an umbrella. And do you know, our George is
    dead and so is the chef.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    So, this fallen carcass which has no feelings and upon whose
    face one steps with impunity is our George! I was again
    seized with terror and suddenly my ears were pierced with
    groans, wild

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_15">15</a></span>

    shrieks, whistlings and cries!
    All the sounds wherewith these braves wail when they are
    crushed. At first I was deafened. I heard nothing. The
    cars caught fire. The flames and smoke shot up into the
    air. The wounded began to groan and, without waiting for
    the flesh to roast, I darted like a flash into the field.
    What a leap!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Fortunately the low hills of the Roman Campagna are very
    convenient for this kind of sport and I was no means behind
    in the line of runners. When, out of breath, I hurled myself
    upon the ground, it was no longer possible to hear or see
    anything. Only Toppi was approaching. But what a terrible
    thing this heart is! My face touched the earth. The earth was
    cool, firm, calm and here I liked it. It seemed as if it had
    restored my breath and put my heart back into its place. I
    felt easier. The stars above were calm. There was nothing for
    them to get excited about. They were not concerned with
    things below. They merely shine in triumph. That is their
    eternal ball. And at this brilliant ball the earth, clothed
    in darkness, appeared as an enchanting stranger in a black
    mask. (Not at all badly expressed? I trust that you, my
    reader, will be pleased: my style and my manners are
    improving!)</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I kissed Toppi in the darkness. I always kiss those I like in
    the darkness. And I said:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_16">16</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are carrying your human form, Toppi, very well. I
    respect you. But what are we to do now? Those lights yonder
    in the sky—they are the lights of Rome. But they are too far
    away!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, it is Rome,” affirmed Toppi, and raised his hand: “do
    you hear whistling?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    From somewhere in the distance came the long-drawn, piercing,
    shrieking of locomotives. They were sounding the alarm.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, they are whistling,” I said and laughed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “They are whistling!” repeated Toppi smiling. He never
    laughs.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But here again I began to feel uncomfortable. I was cold,
    lonely, quivering. In my feet there was still the sensation
    of treading upon corpses. I wanted to shake myself like a dog
    after a bath. You must understand me: it was the first time
    that I had seen and felt your corpse, my dear reader, and if
    you pardon me, it did not appeal to me at all. Why did it not
    protest when I walked over its face? George had such a
    beautiful young face and he carried himself with much
    dignity. Remember your face, too, may be trod upon. And will
    you, too, remain submissive?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We did not proceed to Rome but went instead in search of the
    nearest night lodging. We walked long. We grew tired. We
    longed to drink, oh, how we longed to drink! And now, permit
    me

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_17">17</a></span>

    to present to you my new
    friend, Signor Thomas Magnus and his beautiful daughter,
    Maria.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    At first we observed the faint flicker of a light. As we
    approached nearer we found a little house, its white walls
    gleaming through a thicket of dark cypress trees and
    shrubbery. There was a light in one of the windows, the rest
    were barricaded with shutters. The house had a stone fence,
    an iron gate, strong doors. And—silence. At first glance it
    all looked suspicious.
        <a class="msg" href="#TN_2" title="Sentences edited to remove jumbled phrases.">Toppi</a>
    knocked. Again silence. I
    knocked. Still silence. Finally there came a gruff voice,
    asking from behind the iron door:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Who are you? What do you want?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Hardly mumbling with his parched tongue, my brave Toppi
    narrated the story of the catastrophe and our escape. He
    spoke at length and then came the click of a lock and the
    door was opened. Following behind our austere and silent
    stranger we entered the house, passed through several dark
    and silent rooms, walked up a flight of creaking stairs into
    a brightly lighted room, apparently the stranger’s workroom.
    There was much light, many books, with one open beneath a low
    lamp shaded by a simple, green globe. We had not noticed this
    light in the field. But what astonished me was the silence of
    the house. Despite the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_18">18</a></span>

    rather early hour not a move,
    not a sound, not a voice was to be heard.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Have a seat.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We sat down and Toppi, now almost in pain, began again to
    narrate his story. But the strange host interrupted him:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, a catastrophe. They often occur on our roads. Were
    there many victims?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi continued his prattle and the host, while listening to
    him, took a revolver out of his pocket and hid it in a table
    drawer, adding carelessly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “This is not—a particularly quiet neighborhood. Well, please,
    remain here.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    For the first time he raised his dark eyebrows and his large
    dim eyes and studied us intently as if he were gazing upon
    something savage in a museum. It was an impolite and brazen
    stare. I arose and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I fear that we are not welcome here, Signor, and——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He stopped Me with an impatient and slightly sarcastic
    gesture.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Nonsense, you remain here. I will get you some wine and
    food. My servant is here in the daytime only, so allow me to
    wait on you. You will find the bathroom behind this door. Go
    wash and freshen up while I get the wine. Make yourself at
    home.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_19">19</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    While we ate and drank—with savage relish, I confess—this
    unsympathetic gentleman kept on reading a book as if there
    were no one else in the room, undisturbed by Toppi’s munching
    and the dog’s struggle with a bone. I studied my host
    carefully. Almost my height, his pale face bore an expression
    of weariness. He had a black, oily, bandit-like beard. But
    his brow was high and his nose betrayed good sense. How would
    you describe it? Well, here again I seek comparisons. Imagine
    the nose betraying the story of a great, passionate,
    extraordinary, secret life. It is beautiful and seems to have
    been made not out of muscle and cartilage, but out of—what do
    you call it?—out of thoughts and brazen desires. He seems
    quite brave too. But I was particularly attracted by his
    hands: very big, very white and giving the impression of
    self-control. I do not know why his hands attracted me so
    much. But suddenly I thought: how beautifully exact the
    number of fingers, exactly ten of them, ten thin, evil, wise,
    crooked fingers!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I said politely:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Thank you, signor——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He replied:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “My name is Magnus. Thomas Magnus. Have some wine?
    Americans?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I waited for Toppi to introduce me, according

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_20">20</a></span>

    to the English custom, and I
    looked toward Magnus. One had to be an ignorant,
    illiterate animal not to know me.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi broke in:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Mr. Henry Wondergood of Illinois. His secretary, Irwin
    Toppi, your obedient servant. Yes, citizens of the United
    States.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The old buffoon blurted out his tirade, evincing a thorough
    lack of pride, and Magnus—yes, he was a little startled.
    Billions, my friend, billions. He gazed at Me long and
    intently:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Mr. Wondergood? Henry Wondergood? Are you not, sir, that
    American billionaire who seeks to bestow upon humanity the
    benefits of his billions?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I modestly shook my head in the affirmative.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, I am the gentleman.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi shook his head in affirmation—the ass:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, we are the gentlemen.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus bowed and said with a tinge of irony in his voice:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Humanity is awaiting you, Mr. Wondergood. Judging by the
    Roman newspapers it is extremely impatient. But I must crave
    your pardon for this very modest meal: I did not know....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I seized his large, strangely warm hand and shaking it
    violently, in American fashion, I said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Nonsense, Signor Magnus. I was a swine-herd

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_21">21</a></span>

    before I became a
    billionaire, while you are a straightforward, honest and
    noble gentleman, whose hand I press with the utmost
    respect. The devil take it, not a single human face has
    yet aroused in me as much sympathy as yours!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus said....</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus said nothing! I cannot continue this: “I said,” “he
    said,”—This cursed consistency is deadly to my inspiration.
    It transforms me into a silly romanticist of a boulevard
    sheet and makes me lie like a mediocrity. I have five senses.
    I am a complete human being and yet I speak only of the
    hearing. And how about the sight? I assure you it did not
    remain idle. And this sensation of the earth, of Italy, of My
    existence which I now perceive with a new and sweet strength!
    You imagine that all I did was to listen to wise Thomas
    Magnus. He speaks and I gaze, understand, answer, while I
    think: what a beautiful earth, what a beautiful Campagna di
    Roma! I persisted in penetrating the recesses of the house,
    into its locked silent rooms. With every moment my joy
    mounted at the thought that I am alive, that I can speak and
    play and, suddenly, I rather liked the idea of being human.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I remember that I held out my card to Magnus. “Henry
    Wondergood.” He was surprised, but laid the card politely on
    the table. I felt like implanting

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_22">22</a></span>

    a kiss on his brow for
    this politeness, for the fact that he too was human. I,
    too, am human. I was particularly proud of my foot encased
    in a fine, tan leather shoe and I persisted in swinging
    it: swing on beautiful, human, American foot! I was
    extremely emotional that evening! I even wanted to weep:
    to look my host straight in the eyes and to squeeze out of
    my own eyes, so full of love and goodness, two little
    tears. I actually did it, for at that moment I felt a
    little pleasant sting in my nose, as if it had been hit by
    a spurt of lemonade. I observed that my two little tears
    made an impression upon Magnus.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But Toppi!—While I experienced this wondrous poem of feeling
    human and even of weeping,—he slept like a dead one at the
    very same table. I was rather angered. This was really going
    too far. I wanted to shout at him, but Magnus restrained me:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “He has had a good deal of excitement and is weary, Mr.
    Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The hour had really grown late. We had been talking and
    arguing with Magnus for two hours when Toppi fell asleep. I
    sent him off to bed while we continued to talk and drink for
    quite a while. I drank more wine, but Magnus restrained
    himself. There was a dimness about his face. I was beginning
    to develop an admiration for his

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_23">23</a></span>

    grim and, at times, evil,
    secretive countenance. He said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I believe in your altruistic passion, Mr. Wondergood. But I
    do not believe that you, a man of wisdom and of action, and,
    it seems to me, somewhat cold, could place any serious hopes
    upon your money——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Three billion dollars—that is a mighty power, Magnus!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, three billion dollars, a mighty power, indeed,” he
    agreed, rather unwillingly—“but what will you do with it?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I laughed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You probably want to say what can this ignoramus of an
    American, this erstwhile swine-herd, who knows swine better
    than he knows men, do with the money?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The first business helps the other,” said Magnus.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I dare say you have but a slight opinion of this foolish
    philanthropist whose head has been turned by his gold,” said
    I. “Yes, to be sure, what can I do? I can open another
    university in Chicago, or another maternity hospital in San
    Francisco, or another humanitarian reformatory in New York.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The latter would be a distinct work of mercy,” quoth Magnus.
    “Do not gaze at me with such reproach,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_24">24</a></span>

    Mr. Wondergood: I am not
    jesting. You will find in me the same pure love for
    humanity which burns so fiercely in you.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He was laughing at me and I felt pity for him: not to love
    people! Miserable, unfortunate Magnus. I could kiss his brow
    with great pleasure! Not to love people!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, I do not love them,” affirmed Magnus, “but I am glad
    that you do not intend to travel the conventional road of all
    American philanthropists. Your billions——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Three billions, Magnus! One could build a nation on this
    money——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes?——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Or destroy a nation,” said I. “With this gold, Magnus, one
    can start a war or a revolution——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes?——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I actually succeeded in arousing his interest: his large
    white hands trembled slightly and in his eyes there gleamed
    for a moment a look of respect: “You, Wondergood, are not as
    foolish as I thought!” He arose, paced up and down the room,
    and halting before me asked sneeringly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And you know exactly what your humanity needs most: the
    creation of a new or the destruction of the old state? War or
    peace? Rest or revolution? Who are you, Mr. Wondergood of
    Illinois, that you essay to solve <em>these</em>
    problems?

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_25">25</a></span>

    You had better keep on building
    your maternity hospitals and universities. That is far
    less dangerous work.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I liked the man’s hauteur. I bowed my head modestly and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are right, Signor Magnus. Who am I, Henry Wondergood, to
    undertake the solution of these problems? But I do not intend
    to solve them. I merely indicate them. I indicate them and I
    seek the solution. I seek the solution and the man who can
    give it to me. I have never read a serious book carefully. I
    see you have quite a supply of books here. You are a
    misanthrope, Magnus. You are too much of a European not to be
    easily disillusioned in things, while we, young America,
    believe in humanity. A man must be created. You in Europe are
    bad craftsmen and have created a bad man. We shall create a
    better one. I beg your pardon for my frankness. As long as I
    was merely Henry Wondergood I devoted myself only to the
    creation of pigs—and my pigs, let me say to you, have been
    awarded no fewer medals and decorations than Field Marshal
    Moltke. But now I desire to create people.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus smiled:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are an alchemist, Wondergood: you would transform lead
    into gold!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, I want to create gold and I seek the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_26">26</a></span>

    philosopher’s stone. But has it
    not already been found? It has been found, only you do not
    know how to use it: It is love. Ah, Magnus, I do not know
    yet what I will do, but my plans are heroic and
    magnificent. If not for that misanthropic smile of yours I
    might go further. Believe in Man, Magnus, and give me your
    aid. You know what Man needs most.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He said coldly and with sadness:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “He needs prisons and gallows.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I exclaimed in anger (I am particularly adept in feigning
    anger):</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are slandering me, Magnus! I see that you must have
    experienced some very great misfortune, perhaps treachery
    and——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Hold on, Wondergood! I never speak of myself and do not like
    to hear others speak of me. Let it be sufficient for you to
    know that you are the first man in four years to break in
    upon my solitude and this only due to chance. I do not like
    people.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, pardon. But I do not believe it.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus went over to the bookcase and with an expression of
    supreme contempt he seized the first volume he laid his hands
    upon.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And you who have read no books,” he said, “do you know what
    these books are about? Only about evil, about the mistakes
    and sufferings of

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_27">27</a></span>

    humanity. They are filled with
    tears and blood, Wondergood. Look: in this thin little
    book which I clasp between two fingers is contained a
    whole ocean of human blood, and if you should take all of
    them together——. And who has spilled this blood? The
    devil?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I felt flattered and wanted to bow in acknowledgment, but he
    threw the book aside and shouted:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, sir: Man! Man has spilled this blood! Yes, I do read
    books but only for one purpose; to learn how to hate man and
    to hold him in contempt. You, Wondergood, have transformed
    your pigs into gold, yes? And I can see how your gold is
    being transformed back again into pigs. They will devour you,
    Wondergood. But I do not wish either to prattle or to lie:
    Throw your money into the sea or—build some new prisons and
    gallows. You are vain like all men. Then go on building
    gallows. You will be respected by serious people, while the
    flock in general will call you great. Or, don’t you, American
    from Illinois, want to get into the Pantheon?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, Magnus!——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Blood!” cried Magnus. “Can’t you see that it is everywhere?
    Here it is on your boot now——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I confess that at the moment Magnus appeared to be insane. I
    jerked my foot in sudden fear and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_28">28</a></span>

    only then did I perceive a
    dark, reddish spot on my shoe—how dastardly!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus smiled and immediately regaining his composure
    continued calmly and without emotion:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I have unwittingly startled you, Mr. Wondergood? Nonsense!
    You probably stepped on something inadvertently. A mere
    trifle. But this conversation, a conversation I have not
    conducted for a number of years, makes me uneasy and—good
    night, Mr. Wondergood. To-morrow I shall have the honor of
    presenting you to my daughter, and now you will permit me——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And so on. In short, this gentleman conducted me to my room
    in a most impolite manner and well nigh put me to bed. I
    offered no resistance: why should I? I must say that I did
    not like him at this moment. I was even pleased when he
    turned to go but, suddenly, he turned at the very threshold
    and stepping forward, stretched out his large white hands.
    And murmured:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do you see these hands? There is blood on them! Let it be
    the blood of a scoundrel, a torturer, a tyrant, but it is the
    same, red human blood. Good night!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    —He spoiled my night for me. I swear by eternal salvation
    that on that night I felt great pleasure in being a man, and
    I made myself thoroughly at home in his narrow human skin.
    It

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_29">29</a></span>

    made me feel uncomfortable in
    the armpits. You see, I bought it ready made and thought
    that it would be as comfortable as if it had been made to
    measure! I was highly emotional. I was extremely good and
    affable. I was very eager to play, but I was not inclined
    to tragedy! Blood! How can any person of good breeding
    thrust his white hands under the nose of a
    stranger—Hangmen have very white hands!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Do not think I am jesting. I did not feel well. In the
    daytime I still manage to subdue Wondergood but at night he
    lays his hands upon me. It is he who fills me with his silly
    dreams and shakes within me his entire dusty archive—And how
    godlessly silly and meaningless are his dreams! He fusses
    about within me all night long like a returned master, seems
    to be looking about for something, grumbles about losses and
    wear and tear and sneezes and cavorts about like a dog lying
    uncomfortable on its bed. It is he who draws me in at night
    like a mass of wet lime into the depths of miserable
    humanity, where I nearly choke to death. When I awake in the
    morning I feel that Wondergood has infused ten more degrees
    of human into me—Think of it: He may soon eject me all
    together and leave me standing outside—he, the miserable
    owner of an empty barn into which I brought breath and soul!

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_30">30</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Like a hurried thief I crawled into a stranger’s clothes, the
    pockets of which are bulging with forged promissory notes—no,
    still worse!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    It is not only uncomfortable attire. It is a low, dark and
    stifling jail, wherein I occupy less space than a ring might
    in the stomach of Wondergood. You, my dear reader, have been
    hidden in your prison from childhood and you even seem to
    like it, but I—I come from the kingdom of liberty. And I
    refuse to be Wondergood’s tape worm: one swallow of poison
    and I am free again. What will you say then, scoundrel
    Wondergood? Without me you will be devoured by the worms. You
    will crack open at the seams—Miserable carcass! touch me not!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    On this night however I was in the absolute power of
    Wondergood. What is human blood to Me? What do I care about
    the troubles of <em>their</em> life! But Wondergood was quite
    aroused by the crazy Magnus. Suddenly I felt—just think of
    it—! That I am filled with blood, like the bladder of an ox,
    and the bladder is very thin and weak, so that it would be
    dangerous to prick it. Prick it and out spurts the blood! I
    was terrified at the idea that I might be killed in this
    house: That some one might cut my throat and turning me
    upside down, hanging by the legs, would let the blood run out
    upon the floor.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_31">31</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I lay in the darkness and strained my ears to hear whether or
    not Magnus was approaching with his white hands. And the
    greater the silence in this cursed house the more terrified I
    grew. Even Toppi failed to snore as usual. This made me
    angry. Then my body began to ache. Perhaps I was injured in
    the wreck, or was it weariness brought on by the flight? Then
    my body began to itch in the most ordinary way and I even
    began to move the feet: it was the appearance of the jovial
    clown in the tragedy!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Suddenly a dream seized Me by the feet and dragged me rapidly
    below. I hardly had time enough to shout. And what nonsense
    arose before me! Do you ever have such dreams? I felt that I
    was a bottle of champagne, with a thin neck and sealed, but
    filled not with wine but with blood! And it seemed that not
    only I but all people had become bottles with sealed tops and
    all of us were arranged in a row on a seashore. And, Someone
    horrible was approaching from Somewhere and wanted to smash
    us all. And I saw how foolish it would be to do so and wanted
    to shout: “Don’t smash them. Get a corkscrew!” But I had no
    voice. I was a bottle. Suddenly the dead lackey George
    approached. In his hands was a huge sharp corkscrew. He said
    something

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_32">32</a></span>

    and seized me by the throat—Ah,
    ah, by the throat!——</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I awoke in pain. Apparently he did try to open me up. My
    wrath was so great that I neither sighed nor smiled nor
    moved. I simply killed Wondergood again. I gnashed my teeth,
    straightened out my eyes, closed them calmly, stretched out
    at full length and lay peacefully in the full consciousness
    of the greatness of my Ego. Had the ocean itself moved up on
    me I would not have batted an eye! Get thee hence, my friend,
    I wish to be alone.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And the body grew silent, colorless, airy and empty again.
    With light step I left it and before my eyes there arose a
    vision of the <em>extraordinary</em>, that which cannot be
    expressed in your language, my poor friend! Satisfy your
    curiosity with the dream I have just confided to you and ask
    no more! Or does not the “huge, sharp corkscrew” suit you?
    But it is so—artistic!</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="v-indent">
    In the morning I was well again, refreshed and beautiful. I
    yearned for the play, like an actor who has just left his
    dressing room. Of course I did not forget to shave. This
    canaille Wondergood gets overgrown with hair as quickly as
    his golden skinned pigs. I complained about this to Toppi
    with whom, while waiting for Magnus, I

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_33">33</a></span>

    was walking in the garden. And
    Toppi, thinking a while, replied philosophically:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, man sleeps and his beard grows. This is as it should
    be—for the barbers!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus appeared. He was no more hospitable than yesterday and
    his pale face carried unmistakable indications of weariness.
    But he was calm and polite. How black his beard is in the
    daytime! He pressed my hand in cold politeness and said: (we
    were perched on a wall.)</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are enjoying the Roman Campagna, Mr. Wondergood? A
    magnificent sight! It is said that the Campagna is noted for
    its fevers, but there is but one fever it produces in me—the
    fever of thought!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Apparently Wondergood did not have much of a liking for
    nature, and I have not yet managed to develop a taste for
    earthly landscape: an empty field for me. I cast my eyes
    politely over the countryside before us and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “People interest me more, Signor Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He gazed at me intently with his dark eyes and lowering his
    voice said dryly and with apparent reluctance:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Just two words about people, Mr. Wondergood. You will soon
    see my daughter, Maria. She is my three billions. You
    understand?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I nodded my head in approval.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_34">34</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But your California does not produce such gold. Neither does
    any other country on this dirty earth. It is the gold of the
    heavens. I am not a believer, Mr. Wondergood, but even I
    experience some doubts when I meet the gaze of my Maria. Hers
    are the only hands into which you might without the slightest
    misgiving place your billions——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am an old bachelor and I was overcome with fear, but Magnus
    continued sternly with a ring of triumph in his voice:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But she will not accept them, Sir! Her gentle hands must
    never touch this golden dirt. Her clean eyes will never
    behold any sight but that of this endless, godless Campagna.
    Here is her monastery, Mr. Wondergood, and there is but one
    exit for her from here: into the Kingdom of Heaven, if it
    does exist!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I beg your pardon but I cannot understand this, my dear
    Magnus!” I protested in great joy. “Life and people——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The face of Thomas Magnus grew angry, as it did yesterday,
    and in stern ridicule, he interrupted me:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And I beg you to grasp, <em>dear</em> Wondergood, that life
    and people are not for Maria. It is enough that I know them.
    My duty was to <em>warn</em> you. And now”—he again assumed
    the attitude

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_35">35</a></span>

    of cold politeness—“I ask you
    to come to my table. You too, Mr. Toppi!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We had begun to eat, and were chattering of small matters,
    when <em>Maria</em> entered. The door through which she
    entered was behind my back. I mistook her soft step for those
    of the maid carrying the dishes, but I was astonished by the
    long-nosed Toppi, sitting opposite me. His eyes grew round
    like circles, his face red, as if he were choking. His Adam’s
    apple seemed to be lifted above his neck as if driven by a
    wave, and to disappear again somewhere behind his narrow,
    ministerial collar. Of course, I thought he was choking to
    death with a fishbone and shouted:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Toppi! What is the matter with you? Take some water.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But Magnus was already on his feet, announcing coldly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “My daughter, Maria. Mr. Henry Wondergood!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I turned about quickly and—how can I express the
    extraordinary when it is inexpressible? It was something more
    than beautiful. It was terrible in its beauty. I do not want
    to seek comparisons. I shall leave that to you. Take all that
    you have ever seen or ever known of the beautiful on earth:
    the lily, the stars, the sun, but add, add still more. But
    not this was the awful aspect

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_36">36</a></span>

    of it: There was something
    else: the elusive yet astonishing similarity—to whom? Whom
    have I met upon this earth who was so beautiful—so
    beautiful and awe-inspiring—awe-inspiring and
    unapproachable. I have learned by this time your entire
    archive, Wondergood, and I do not believe that it comes
    from your modest gallery!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Madonna!” mumbled Toppi in a hoarse voice, scared out of his
    wits.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    So that is it! Yes, Madonna. The fool was right, and I,
    Satan, could understand his terror. Madonna, whom people see
    only in churches, in paintings, in the imagination of
    artists. Maria, the name which rings only in hymns and prayer
    books, heavenly beauty, mercy, forgiveness and love! Star of
    the Seas! Do you like that name: Star of the Seas?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    It was really devilishly funny. I made a deep bow and almost
    blurted out:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Madam, I beg pardon for my unbidden intrusion, but I really
    did not expect to meet you <em>here</em>. I most humbly beg
    your pardon, but I could not imagine that this black bearded
    fellow has the honor of having you for his daughter. A
    thousand times I crave your pardon for——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But enough. I said something else.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “How do you do, Signorina. It is indeed a pleasure.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_37">37</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And she really did not indicate in any way that she was
    <em>already</em> acquainted with Me. One must respect an
    incognito if one would remain a gentleman and only a
    scoundrel would dare to tear a mask from a lady’s face! This
    would have been all the more impossible, because her father,
    Thomas Magnus, continued to urge us with a chuckle:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do eat, please, Mr. Toppi. Why do you not drink, Mr.
    Wondergood? The wine is splendid.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    In the course of what followed:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>
      1. She breathed—</p>
<p>
      2. She blinked—</p>
<p>
      3. She ate—</p></blockquote>
<p>
    and she was a beautiful girl, about eighteen years of age,
    and her dress was white and her throat bare. It was really
    laughable. I gazed at her bare neck and—believe me, my
    earthly friend: I am not easily seduced, I am not a romantic
    youth, but I am not old by any means, I am not at all bad
    looking, I enjoy an independent position in the world
    and—don’t you like the combination: Satan and <em>Maria</em>
    ? <em>Maria</em> and Satan! In evidence of the seriousness of
    my intentions I can submit at that moment I thought more of
    <em>our</em> descendants and sought a name for <em>our</em>
    first-born than indulged in frivolity.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_38">38</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Suddenly Toppi’s Adam’s apple gave a jerk and he inquired
    hoarsely:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Has any one ever painted your portrait, Signorina?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Maria never poses for painters!” broke in Magnus sternly. I
    felt like laughing at the fool Toppi. I had already opened
    wide my mouth, filled with a set of first-class American
    teeth, when Maria’s pure gaze pierced my eyes and everything
    flew to the devil,—as in that moment of the railway
    catastrophe! You understand: she turned me inside out, like a
    stocking—or how shall I put it? My fine Parisian costume was
    driven inside of me and my still finer thoughts which,
    however, I would not have wanted to convey to the lady,
    suddenly appeared upon the surface. With all my secrecy I was
    left no more sealed than a room in a fifteen cent lodging
    house.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But she <em>forgave</em> me, said nothing and threw her gaze
    like a projector in the direction of Toppi, illumining his
    entire body. You, too, would have laughed had you seen how
    this poor old devil was set aglow and aflame by this
    gaze—clear from the prayer book to the fishbone with which he
    nearly choked to death.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Fortunately for both of us Magnus arose and invited us to
    follow him into the garden.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Come, let us go into the garden,” said he.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_39">39</a></span>

    “Maria will show you her favorite flowers.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yes, Maria! But seek no songs of praise from me, oh poet! I
    was mad! I was as provoked as a man whose closet has just
    been ransacked by a burglar. I wanted to gaze at Maria but
    was compelled to look upon the foolish flowers—because I
    dared not lift my eyes. I am a gentleman and cannot appear
    before a lady without a necktie. I was seized by a curious
    humility. Do you like to feel humble? I do not.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I do not know what Maria said. But I swear by eternal
    salvation—her gaze, and her entire uncanny countenance was
    the embodiment of an all-embracing meaning so that any wise
    word I might have uttered would have sounded meaningless. The
    wisdom of words is necessary only for those poor in spirit.
    The right are silent. Take note of that, little poet, sage
    and eternal chatterbox, wherever you may be. Let it be
    sufficient for you that I have humbled myself to speak.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Ah, but I have forgotten my humility! She walked and I and
    Toppi crawled after her. I detested myself and this
    broad-backed Toppi because of his hanging nose and large,
    pale ears. What was needed here was an Apollo and not a pair
    of ordinary Americans.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We felt quite relieved when she had gone and we were left
    alone with Magnus. It was all so

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_40">40</a></span>

    sweet and simple! Toppi
    abandoned his religious airs and I crossed my legs
    comfortably, lit a cigar, and fixed my steel-sharp gaze
    upon the whites of Magnus’s eyes.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You must be off to Rome, Mr. Wondergood. They are probably
    worrying about you,” said our host in a tone of loving
    concern.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I can send Toppi,” I replied. He smiled and added
    ironically:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I hardly think that would be sufficient, Mr. Wondergood!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I sought to clasp his great white hand but it did not seem to
    move closer. But I caught it just the same, pressed it warmly
    and he was compelled to return the pressure!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Very well, Signor Magnus! I am off at once!” I said.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I have already sent for the carriage,” he replied. “Is not
    the Campagna beautiful in the morning?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I again took a polite look at the country-side and said with
    emotion:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, it is beautiful! Irwin, my friend, leave us for a
    moment. I have a few words to say to Signor Magnus——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi left and Signor Magnus opened wide his big sad eyes. I
    again tried my steel on him, and bending forward closer to
    his dark face, I asked:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_41">41</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Have you ever observed <em>dear</em> Magnus, the very
    striking resemblance between your daughter, the Signorina
    Maria, and a certain—celebrated personage? Don’t you think
    she resembles the Madonna?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Madonna?” drawled out Magnus. “No, <em>dear</em> Wondergood,
    I haven’t noticed that. I never go to church. But I fear you
    will be late. The Roman fever——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I again seized his white hand and shook it vigorously. No, I
    did not tear it off. And from my eyes there burst forth again
    <em>those</em> two tears:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Let us speak plainly, Signor Magnus,” said I. “I am a
    straightforward man and have grown to love you. Do you want
    to come along with me and be the lord of my billions?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus was silent. His hand lay motionless in mine. His eyes
    were lowered and something dark seemed to pass over his face,
    then immediately to disappear. Finally he said, seriously and
    simply:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I understand you, Mr. Wondergood—but I must refuse. No, I
    will not go with you. I have failed to tell you one thing,
    but your frankness and confidence in me compels me to say
    that I must, to a certain extent, steer clear of the police.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The Roman police,” I asked, betraying a slight excitement.
    “Nonsense, we shall buy it.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_42">42</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, the international,” he replied. “I hope you do not think
    that I have committed some base crime. The trouble is not
    with police which can be bought. You are right, Mr.
    Wondergood, when you say that one can buy almost any one. The
    truth is that I can be of no use to you. What do you want me
    for? You love humanity and I detest it. At best I am
    indifferent to it. Let it live and not interfere with me.
    Leave me my Maria, leave me the right and strength to detest
    people as I read the history of their life. Leave me my
    Campagna and that is all I want and all of which I am
    capable. All the oil within me has burned out, Wondergood.
    You see before you an extinguished lamp hanging on a wall, a
    lamp which once—Goodbye.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I do not ask your confidence, Magnus,” I interjected.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Pardon me, you will never receive it, Mr. Wondergood. My
    name is an invention but it is the only one I can offer to my
    friends.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    To tell the truth: I liked “Thomas Magnus” at that moment. He
    spoke bravely and simply. In his face one could read
    stubbornness and will. This man knew the value of human life
    and had the mien of one condemned to death. But it was the
    mien of a proud, uncompromising criminal, who will never
    accept the ministrations of a

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_43">43</a></span>

    priest! For a moment I thought:
    My Father had many bastard children, deprived of legacy
    and wandering about the world. Perhaps Thomas Magnus is
    one of these wanderers? And is it possible that I have met
    a <em>brother</em> on this earth? Very interesting. But
    from a purely human, business point of view, one cannot
    help but respect a man whose hands are steeped in blood!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I saluted, changed my position, and in the humblest possible
    manner, asked Magnus’s permission to visit him occasionally
    and seek his advice. He hesitated but finally looked me
    straight in the face and agreed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Very well, Mr. Wondergood. You may come. I hope to hear from
    you things that may supplement the knowledge I glean from my
    books. And, by the way, Mr. Toppi has made an excellent
    impression upon my Maria”——</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Toppi?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes. She has found a striking resemblance between him and
    one of her favorite saints. She goes to church frequently.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi a saint! Or has his prayer book overbalanced his huge
    back and the fishbone in his throat. Magnus gazed at me
    almost gently and only his thin nose seemed to tremble
    slightly with restrained laughter.—It is very pleasant to
    know that behind this austere exterior there is

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_44">44</a></span>

    so much quiet and restrained merriment!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    It was twilight when we left. Magnus followed us to the
    threshold, but Maria remained in seclusion. The little white
    house surrounded by the cypress trees was as quiet and silent
    as we found it yesterday, but the silence was of a different
    character: the silence was the soul of Maria.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I confess that I felt rather sad at this departure but very
    soon came a new series of impressions, which dispelled this
    feeling. We were approaching Rome. We entered the brightly
    illuminated, densely populated streets through some opening
    in the city wall and the first thing we saw in the Eternal
    City was a creaking trolley car, trying to make its way
    through the same hole in the wall. Toppi, who was acquainted
    with Rome, revelled in the familiar atmosphere of the
    churches we were passing and indicated with his long finger
    the <em>remnants</em> of ancient Rome which seemed to be
    clinging to the huge wall of the new structures: just as if
    the latter had been bombarded with the shells of old and
    fragments of the missiles had clung to the bricks.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Here and there we came upon additional heaps of this old
    rubbish. Above a low parapet of stone, we observed a dark
    shallow ditch and a large triumphal gate, half sunk in the
    earth. “The Forum!” exclaimed Toppi, majestically. Our

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_45">45</a></span>

    coachman nodded his head in
    affirmation. With every new pile of old stone and brick
    the fellow swelled with pride, while I longed for my New
    York and its skyscrapers, and tried to calculate the
    number of trucks that would be necessary to clear these
    heaps of rubbish called ancient Rome away before morning.
    When I mentioned this to Toppi he was insulted and
    replied:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You don’t understand anything: better close your eyes and
    just reflect that you are in Rome.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I did so and was again convinced that sight is as much of an
    impediment to the mind as sound: not without reason are all
    wise folk on the earth blind and all good musicians deaf.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Like Toppi I began to sniff the air and through my sense of
    smell I gathered more of Rome and its horribly long and
    highly entertaining history than hitherto: thus a decaying
    leaf in the woods smells stronger than the young and green
    foliage. Will you believe me when I say that I sensed the
    odor of blood and Nero? But when I opened my eyes expectantly
    I observed a plain, everyday kiosk and a lemonade stand.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, how do you like it?” growled Toppi, still
    dissatisfied.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It smells——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, certainly it smells! It will smell

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_46">46</a></span>

    stronger with every hour: these
    are old, strong aromas, Mr. Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And so it really was: the odor grew in strength. I cannot
    find comparisons to make it clear to you. All the sections of
    my brain began to move and buzz like bees aroused by smoke.
    It is strange, but it seems that Rome is included in the
    archive of the silly Wondergood. Perhaps this is his native
    town? When we approached a certain populous square I sensed
    the clear odor of some blood relatives, which was soon
    followed by the conviction that I, too, have walked these
    streets before. Have I, like Toppi, previously donned the
    human form? Ever louder buzzed the bees. My entire beehive
    buzzed and suddenly thousands of faces, dim and white,
    beautiful and horrible, began to dance before me; thousands
    upon thousands of voices, noises, cries, laughters and sighs
    nearly set me deaf. No, this was no longer a beehive: it was
    a huge, fiery smithy, where firearms were being forged with
    the red sparks flying all about. Iron!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Of course, if I had lived in Rome before, I must have been
    one of its emperors: I <em>remember</em> the expression of my
    face. I remember the movement of my bare neck as I turn my
    head. I remember the touch of golden laurels upon my bald
    head—Iron!

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_47">47</a></span>

    Ah, I hear the steps of the iron legions of Rome. I hear
    the iron voices: “Vivat Cæsar!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am hot. I am burning. Or was I not an emperor but simply
    one of the “victims” when Rome burned down in accordance with
    the magnificent plan of Nero? No, this is not a fire. This is
    a funeral pyre on which I am forcibly esconsced. I hear the
    snake-like hissing of the tongues of flame beneath my feet. I
    strain my neck, all lined with blue veins, and in my throat
    there rises the final curse—or blessing? Think of it: I even
    remember that Roman face in the front row of spectators,
    which even then gave me no rest because of its idiotic
    expression and sleepy eyes: I am being burned and it sleeps!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Hotel ‘Internationale’”—cried Toppi, and I opened my eyes.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We were going up a hill along a quiet street, at the end of
    which there glowed a large structure, worthy even of New
    York: it was the hotel where we had previously wired for
    reservations. They probably thought we had perished in the
    wreck. My funeral pyre was extinguished. I grew as merry as a
    darkey who has just escaped from hard labor and I whispered
    to Toppi:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, Toppi, and how about the Madonna?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Y-yes, interesting. I was frightened at first and nearly
    choked to death——”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_48">48</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “With a bone? You are silly, Toppi: she is polite and did not
    recognize you. She simply took you for one of her saints. It
    is a pity, old boy, that we have chosen for ourselves these
    solemn, American faces: had we looked around more carefully
    we might have found some more beautiful.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am quite satisfied with mine,” said Toppi sadly, and
    turned away. A glow of secret self-satisfaction appeared upon
    his long, shiny nose. Ah, Toppi, Ah, the saint!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But we were already being accorded a triumphal reception.</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      February 14.<br/>
      Rome, Hotel “Internationale.”</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    I do not want to go to Magnus. I am thinking too much of his
    Madonna of flesh and bone. I have come here to lie and to
    play merrily and I am not at all taken by the prospect of
    being a mediocre actor, who weeps behind the scenes and
    appears on the stage with his eyes perfectly dry. Moreover, I
    have no time to gad about the fields catching butterflies
    with a net like a boy.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The whole of Rome is buzzing about me. I am an extraordinary
    man, who loves his fellow beings and I am celebrated. The
    mobs who flock to worship Me are no less numerous than those
    who worship

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_49">49</a></span>

    the Vicar of Christ
    himself, two Popes all at once.—Yes, happy Rome cannot
    consider itself an orphan!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am now living at the hotel, where all is aquiver with
    ecstacy when I put my shoes outside my door for the night,
    but they are renovating a palace for me: the historic Villa
    Orsini. Painters, sculptors and poets are kept busy. One
    brush-pusher is already painting my portrait, assuring me
    that I remind him of one of the Medicis. The other
    brush-pushers are sharpening their knives for him.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I ask him:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And can you paint a Madonna?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Certainly he can. It was he, if the signor recollects, who
    painted the famous Turk on the cigarette boxes, the Turk
    whose fame is known even in America. And now three
    brush-pushers are painting Madonnas for me. The rest are
    running about Rome seeking models. I said to one, in my
    barbarous, American ignorance of the higher arts:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But if you find such a model, Signor, just bring her to me.
    Why waste paint and canvas?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He was evidently pained and mumbled:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Ah, Signor—a model?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I think he took me for a merchant in “live stock.” But, fool,
    why do I need your aid for which I must pay a commission,
    when my ante-chamber

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_50">50</a></span>

    is filled with a flock
    of beauties? They all worship me. I remind them of
    Savanarola, and they seek to transform every dark corner
    in my drawing room, and every soft couch into a
    confessional. I am so glad that these society ladies, like
    the painters, know so well the history of their country
    and realize who I am.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The joy of the Roman papers on finding that I did not perish
    in the wreck and lost neither my legs nor my billions, was
    equal to the joy of the papers of Jerusalem on the day of the
    resurrection of Christ—in reality there was little cause for
    satisfaction on the part of the latter, as far as I am able
    to read history. I feared that I might remind the journalists
    of J. Cæsar, but fortunately they think little of the past
    and confined themselves to pointing out my resemblance to
    President Wilson. Scoundrels! They were simply flattering my
    American patriotism. To the majority, however, I recall a
    Prophet, but they do not know which one. On this point they
    are modestly silent. At any rate it is not Mahomet: my
    opposition to marriage is well known at all telegraph
    stations.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    It is difficult to imagine the filth on which I fed my hungry
    interviewers. Like an experienced swine-herd, I gaze with
    horror on the mess they feed upon. They eat and yet they
    live. Although,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_51">51</a></span>

    I must admit, I do not see them
    growing fat! Yesterday morning I flew in an aeroplane over
    Rome and the Campagna. You will probably ask whether I saw
    Maria’s home? No. I did not find it: how can one find a
    grain of sand among a myriad of other grains—But I really
    did not look for it: I felt horror-stricken at the great
    altitude.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But my good interviewers, restless and impatient, were
    astounded by my coolness and courage. One fellow, strong,
    surly and bearded, who reminded me of Hannibal, was the first
    to reach me after the flight, and asked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Did not the sensation of flying in the air, Mr. Wondergood,
    the feeling of having conquered the elements, thrill you with
    a sense of pride in man, who has subdued——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He repeated the question: they don’t seem to trust me,
    somehow, and are always suggesting the proper answers. But I
    shrugged my shoulders and exclaimed sadly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Can you imagine Signor—No! Only once did I have a sense of
    pride in men and that was—in the lavatory on board the
    ‘Atlantic.’”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh! In the lavatory! But what happened? A storm, and you
    were astounded by the genius of man, who has subdued——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Nothing extraordinary happened. But I was

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_52">52</a></span>

    astounded by the genius of man
    who managed to create a palace out of such a disgusting
    necessity as a lavatory.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “A real temple, in which one is the arch priest!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Permit me to make a note of that. It is such an
    original—illumination of the problem——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And to-day the whole Eternal City was feeding on this sally.
    Not only did they not request me to leave the place, but on
    the contrary, this was the day of the first official visits
    to my apartments: something on the order of a minister of
    state, an ambassador or some other palace chef came and
    poured sugar and cinnamon all over me as if I were a pudding.
    Later in the day I returned the visits: it is not very
    pleasant to keep such things.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Need I say that I have a nephew? Every American millionaire
    has a nephew in Europe. My nephew’s name is also Wondergood.
    He is connected with some legation, is very correct in
    manners and his bald spot is so oiled that my kiss could
    serve me as a breakfast were I fond of scented oil. But one
    must be willing to sacrifice something, especially the
    gratification of a sense of smell. The kiss cost me not a
    cent, while it meant a great deal to the young man. It opened
    for him a wide credit on soap and perfumery.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_53">53</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But enough! When I look at these ladies and gentlemen and
    reflect that they are just as they were at the court of
    Aschurbanipal and that for the past 2000 years the pieces of
    silver received by Judas continue to bear interest, like his
    kiss—I grow bored with this old and threadbare play. Ah, I
    want a great play. I seek originality and talent. I want
    beautiful lines and bold strokes. This company here casts me
    in the rôle of an old brass band conductor. At times I come
    to the conclusion that it wasn’t really worth my while to
    have undertaken such a long journey for the sake of this old
    drivel—to exchange ancient, magnificent and multi-colored
    Hell for its miserable replica. In truth, I am sorry that
    Magnus and his Madonna refused to join me—we would have
    played a little—just a little!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I have had but one interesting morning. In fact I was quite
    excited. The congregation of a so-called “free” church,
    composed of very serious men and women, who insist upon
    worshipping in accordance with the dictates of their
    conscience, invited Me to deliver a Sunday sermon. I donned a
    black frock coat, which gave me a close resemblance to—Toppi,
    went through a number of particularly expressive gestures
    before my mirror and was driven in an automobile, like a
    prophet—moderne, to the service. I took as my subject
    or

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_54">54</a></span>

    “text” Jesus’ advice to the
    rich youth to distribute his wealth among the poor—and in
    not more than half an hour, I demonstrated as conclusively
    as 2 and 2 make 4, that love of one’s neighbor is the all
    important thing. Like a practical and careful American,
    however, I pointed out that it was not necessary to try
    and go after the whole of the kingdom of Heaven at one
    shot and to distribute one’s wealth carelessly; that one
    can buy it up in lots on the instalment plan and by easy
    payments. The faces of the faithful bore a look of extreme
    concentration. They were apparently figuring out something
    and came to the conclusion that on the basis I suggested,
    the Kingdom of Heaven was attainable for the pockets of
    all of them.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Unfortunately, a number of my quick-witted compatriots were
    present in the congregation. One of them was about to rise to
    his feet to propose the formation of a stock company, when I
    realized the danger and frustrated this plan by letting loose
    a fountain of emotion, and thus extinguished his religiously
    practical zeal! What did I not talk about? I wept for my sad
    childhood, spent in labor and privation; I whined about my
    poor father who perished in a match factory. I prayed
    solemnly for all my brothers and sisters in Christ. The swamp
    I created was so huge that

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_55">55</a></span>

    the journalists caught enough
    wild ducks to last them for six months. How we wept!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I shivered with the dampness and began to beat energetically
    the drum of my billions: dum-dum! Everything for others, not
    a cent for me: dum-dum! With a brazenness worthy of the whip
    I concluded “with the words of the Great Teacher:”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Come ye unto me all who are heavy-laden and weary and I will
    comfort ye!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Ah, what a pity I cannot perform miracles! A little practical
    miracle, something on the order of transforming a bottle of
    water into one of sour Chianti or some of the worshippers
    into pastry, would have gone a long way at that moment.—You
    laugh and are angry, my earthy reader? There is no reason for
    you to act thus. Remember only that the
    <em>extraordinary</em> cannot be expressed in your
    ventriloquist language and that my words are merely a cursed
    mask for my thoughts.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Maria!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    You will read of my success in the newspapers. There was one
    fool, however, who almost spoiled my day for me: he was a
    member of the Salvation Army. He came to see me and suggested
    that I immediately take up a trumpet and lead the army into
    battle—they were too cheap laurels he offered

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_56">56</a></span>

    and I drove him out. But
    Toppi—he was triumphantly silent all the way home and
    finally he said very respectfully:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You were in fine mettle to-day, Mr. Wondergood. I even wept.
    It is a pity that neither Magnus nor his daughter heard you
    preach, She—she would have changed her opinion of us.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    You understand, of course, that I felt like kicking this
    admirer out of the carriage! I again felt in the pupils of my
    eyes the piercing sting of hers. The speed with which I was
    again turned inside out and spread out on a plate for the
    public’s view is equal only to that with which an experienced
    waiter opens a can of conserves. I drew my top hat over my
    eyes, raised the collar of my coat and looking very much like
    a tragedian just hissed off the stage, I rode silently, and
    without acknowledging the greetings showered upon me, I
    proceeded to my apartments. Ah, that gaze of Maria! And how
    could I have acknowledged the greetings when I had no cane
    with me?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I have declined all of to-day’s invitations and am at home: I
    am engaged in “religious meditation”—this was how Toppi
    announced it to the journalists. He has really begun to
    respect me. Before me are whiskey and champagne. I am slowly
    filling up on the liquor while from the dining hall below
    come the distant strains of music.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_57">57</a></span>

    My Wondergood was apparently
    considerable of a drunkard and every night he drags me to
    the wineshop, to which I interpose no objection. What’s
    the difference? Fortunately his intoxication is of a merry
    kind and we make quite a pleasant time of it. At first we
    cast our dull eyes over the furniture and involuntarily
    begin to calculate the value of all this bronze, these
    carpets, Venetian mirrors, etc.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “A trifle!” we agree, and with peculiar self-satisfaction we
    lose ourselves in the contemplation of our own billions, of
    our power and our remarkable wisdom and character. Our bliss
    increases with each additional glass. With peculiar pleasure
    we wallow in the cheap luxury of the hotel, and—think of
    it!—I am actually beginning to have a liking for bronze,
    carpets, glass and stones. My Puritan Toppi condemns luxury.
    It reminds him of Sodom and Gommorah. But it is difficult for
    me to part with these little emotional pleasures. How silly
    of me!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We continue to listen dully and half-heartedly to the music
    and venture to whistle some accompaniments. We add a little
    contemplation on the decollete of the ladies and then, with
    our step still firm, we proceed to our resting room.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But we were just ready for bed when suddenly I felt as if
    some one had struck me a blow and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_58">58</a></span>

    I was immediately seized with a
    tempest of tears, of love and sadness. The extraordinary
    suddenly found expression. I grew as broad as space, as
    deep as eternity and I embraced all in a single breath!
    But, oh, what sadness! Oh, what love, Maria!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But I am nothing more than a subterranean lake in the belly
    of Wondergood and my storms in no way disturb his firm tread.
    I am only a solitaire in his stomach, of which he seeks to
    rid himself!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We ring for the servants.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Soda!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am simply drunk. Arrivederci, Signor, buona notte!</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      Rome, Hotel “Internationale.”</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yesterday I visited Magnus. I was compelled to wait long for
    him, in the garden, and when he did appear he was so cold and
    indifferent that I felt like leaving. I observed a few gray
    hairs in his black beard. I had not noticed them before. Was
    Maria unwell? I appeared concerned. Everything here is so
    uncertain that on leaving a person for one hour one may have
    to seek him in
        <a class="msg" href="#TN_9" title="Part of the sentence asking about Maria appears
to be missing from the original.">eternity</a>.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Maria is well, thank you,” replied Magnus,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_59">59</a></span>

    frigidly. He seemed surprised
    as if my question were presumptuous and improper. “And how
    are your affairs, Mr. Wondergood? The Roman papers are
    filled with news of you. You are scoring a big success.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    With pain aggravated by the absence of Maria, I revealed to
    Magnus my disappointment and my ennui. I spoke well, not
    without wit and sarcasm. I grew more and more provoked by his
    lack of attention and interest, plainly written on his pale
    and weary face. Not once did he smile or venture to put any
    questions, but when I reached the story of my “nephew” he
    frowned in displeasure and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Fie! This is a cheap variety farce! How can you occupy
    yourself with such trifles, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I replied angrily:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But it is not I who am occupying myself with them, Signor
    Magnus!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And how about the interviews? What about that flight of
    yours? You should drive them away. This humbles your...three
    billions. And is it true that you delivered some sort
    of a sermon?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The joy of play forsook me. Unwilling as Magnus was to listen
    to me, I told him all about my sermon and those credulous
    fools who swallowed sacrilege as they do marmalade.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_60">60</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And did you expect anything different, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I expected that they would fall upon me with clubs for my
    audacity: When I sacrilegiously bandied about the words of
    the Testament....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, they are beautiful words,” agreed Magnus. “But didn’t
    you know that all their worship of God and all their faith
    are nothing but sacrilege? When they term a wafer the body of
    Christ, while some Sixtus or Pius reigns undisturbed, and
    with the approval of all Catholics as the Vicar of Christ,
    why should not you, an American from Illinois, call yourself
    at least...his governor? This is not meant as sacrilege,
    Mr. Wondergood. These are simply allegories, highly
    convenient for blockheads, and you are only wasting your
    wrath. But when will you get down to <em>business</em>?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I threw up my hands in skillfully simulated sorrow:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I <em>want</em> to do something, but I <em>know</em> not
    what to do. I shall probably never get down to business until
    you, Magnus, agree to come to my aid.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He frowned, at his own large, motionless, white hands and
    then at me:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are too credulous, Mr. Wondergood. This is a great fault
    when one has three billions. No,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_61">61</a></span>

    I am of no use to you. Our roads are far apart.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But, dear Magnus!...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I expected him to strike me for this gentle <em>dear</em>,
    which I uttered in my best possible falsetto. But I ventured
    to continue. With all the sweetness I managed to accumulate
    in Rome, I looked upon the dim physiognomy of my friend and
    in a still gentler falsetto, I asked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And of what nationality are you, my <em>dear</em>...Signor
    Magnus? I suspect for some reason that you are not Italian?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He replied calmly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, I am not Italian.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But where is your country?——”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “My country?... Omne solum liberam libero patria. I suppose
    you do not know Latin? It means: Where freedom is there is
    the fatherland of every free man. Will you take breakfast
    with me?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The invitation was couched in such icy tones and Maria’s
    absence was so strongly implied therein that I was compelled
    to decline it politely. The devil take this man! I was not at
    all in a merry mood that morning. I fervently wished to weep
    upon his breast while he mercilessly threw cold showers upon
    my noblest transports. I sighed and changed my pose. I
    assumed a pose prepared

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_62">62</a></span>

    especially for Maria. Speaking
    in a low voice, I said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I want to be frank with you, Signor Magnus. My
    past...contains many dark pages, which I should like to
    redeem. I....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He quickly interrupted me:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “There are dark pages in everybody’s past, Mr. Wondergood. I
    myself am not so clear of reproach as to accept the
    confession of such a worthy gentleman.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am a poor spiritual father,” he added with a most
    unpleasant laugh: “<em>I never pardon sinners</em> and, in
    view of that, what pleasure could there be for you in your
    confession. Better tell me something more about your nephew.
    Is he young?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We spoke about my nephew—and Magnus smiled. A pause ensued.
    Then Magnus asked whether I had visited the Vatican gallery
    and I bade him good-by, requesting him to transmit my
    compliments to Maria. I confess I was a sorry sight and felt
    deeply indebted to Magnus when he said in bidding me
    farewell:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do not be angry with me, Mr. Wondergood. I am not altogether
    well to-day and...am rather worried about my affairs.
    That’s all. I hope to be more pleasant when we meet again,
    but be so kind as to excuse me this morning. I shall see that
    Maria gets your compliments.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_63">63</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    If this blackbearded fellow were only <em>playing</em>, I
    confess I would have found a worthy partner.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    A dozen pickaninnies could not have licked off the honeyed
    expression my face assumed at Magnus’ promise to transmit my
    greetings to Maria. All the way back to my hotel I smiled
    idiotically at the coachman’s back and afterwards bestowed a
    kiss on Toppi’s brow—the canaile still maintains an odor of
    fur, like a young devil.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I see there was profit in your visit,” said Toppi
    significantly. “How is Magnus’...daughter? You understand?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Splendid, Toppi, splendid! She said that my beauty and
    wisdom reminded her of Solomon’s!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi smiled condescendingly at my unsuccessful jest. The
    honeyed expression left my face and rust and vinegar took the
    place of the sugar. I locked myself in my room and for a long
    time continued to curse Satan for falling in love with a
    woman.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    You consider yourself original, my earthly friend, when you
    fall in love with a woman and begin to quiver all over with
    the fever of love. And I do not. I can see the legions of
    couples, from Adam and Eve on; I can see their kisses and
    caresses; I can hear the words so cursedly monotonous, and I
    begin to detest my own lips daring to mumble the mumbling of
    others, my eyes,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_64">64</a></span>

    simulating the gaze of others,
    my heart, surrendering obediently to the click of the lock
    of a house of shame. I can see all these excited animals
    in their groaning and their caresses and I cry with
    revulsion at my own mass of bones and flesh and nerves!
    Take care, Satan in human form, Deceit is coming over You!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Won’t you take Maria for yourself, my earthly friend? Take
    her. She is yours, not mine. Ah, if Maria were my slave, I
    would put a rope around her neck and would take her, naked,
    to the market place: Who will buy? Who will pay the most for
    this unearthly beauty? Ah, do not hurt the poor blind
    merchant: open wide your purses, jingle louder your gold,
    generous gentlemen!...</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    What, she will not go? Fear not, Signor, she will come and
    she will love you.... This is simply her maidenly modesty,
    Sir! Shall I tie the other end of the rope about her and lead
    her to your bed, kind sir? Take the rope along with you. I
    charge nothing for that. Only rid me of this heavenly beauty!
    She has the face of the radiant Madonna. She is the daughter
    of the honorable Thomas Magnus and both of them are thieves:
    he stole his white hands and she—her pristine face! Ah....</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But I am beginning to play with you, dear reader? That is a
    mistake: I have simply taken

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_65">65</a></span>

    the wrong note book. No, it is
    not a mistake. It is worse. I play because my loneliness
    is very great, very deep—I fear it has no bottom at all! I
    stand on the edge of an abyss and hurl words, many heavy
    words, into it, but they fall without a sound. I hurl into
    it laughter, threats and moans. I spit into it. I fling
    into it heaps of stones and rocks. I throw mountains into
    it—and still it remains silent and empty. No, really,
    there is no bottom to this abyss and we toil in vain, you
    and I, my friend!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    ...But I see your smile and your cunning laugh: you
    <em>understand</em> why I spoke so sourly of loneliness....
    Ah, ’tis love! And you want to ask whether I have a mistress?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yes: there are two. One is a Russian countess. The other, an
    Italian countess. They differ only in the kind of perfume
    they use. But this is such an immaterial matter that I love
    them both equally.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    You probably wish to ask also whether I shall ever visit
    Magnus again?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yes, I shall go to Magnus. I love him very much. It matters
    little that his name is false and that his daughter has the
    audacity to resemble the Madonna. I haven’t enough of
    Wondergood in me to be particular about a name—and I am

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_66">66</a></span>

    too <em>human</em> not to
    forgive the efforts of others to appear <em>divine</em>.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I swear by eternal salvation that the one is worthy of the
    other!</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      February 21, 1914.<br/>
      Rome, Villa Orsini.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    Cardinal X., the closest friend and confidante of the Pope,
    has paid me a visit. He was accompanied by two abbés. In
    general, he is a personage whose attentions to me have
    brought me no small measure of prestige.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I met His Eminence in the reception hall of my new palace.
    Toppi was dancing all about the priests, snatching their
    blessings quicker than a lover does the kisses of his
    mistress. Six devout hands hardly managed to handle one
    Devil, grown pious, and before we had reached the threshold
    of my study, he actually contrived to touch the belly of the
    Cardinal. What ecstasy!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Cardinal X. speaks all the European languages and, out of
    respect for the Stars and Stripes and my billions, he spoke
    English. He began the conversation by congratulating me upon
    the acquisition of the Villa Orsini and told me its history
    in detail for the past 200 years. This was quite unexpected,
    very long, at times confusing and unintelligible, so that I
    was compelled, like a real

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_67">67</a></span>

    American ass, to blink
    constantly...but this gave me an opportunity to study my
    distinguished and eminent visitor.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He is not at all old. He is broad shouldered, well built and
    in good health. He has a large, almost square face, an olive
    skin, with a bluish tinge upon his shaven cheeks, and his
    thin, but beautiful hands reveal his Spanish blood. Before he
    dedicated himself to God, Cardinal X. was a Spanish grandee
    and duke. But his dark eyes are too small and too deeply set
    beneath his thick eyebrows and the distance between the short
    nose and the thin lips is too long.... All this reminds me of
    some one. But of whom? And what is this curious habit I have
    of being reminded of some one? Probably a saint?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    For a moment the cardinal was lost in thought and suddenly I
    recalled: Yes, this is simply a shaven <em>monkey</em>! This
    must be its sad, boundless pensiveness, <em>its</em> evil
    gleam within the narrow pupil!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But in a moment the Cardinal laughed, jested and gesticulated
    like a Neapolitan lazzarone—he was no longer telling me the
    history of the palace. He was playing, he was interpreting it
    in facial expression and dramatic monologue! He has short
    fingers, not at all like those of a monkey, and when he
    gesticulates he rather resembles a

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_68">68</a></span>

    penguin while his voice reminds
    me of a talking parrot—Who are you, anyhow?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    No, a monkey! He is laughing again and I observe that he
    really does not know how to laugh. It is as if he had learned
    the human art of laughter but yesterday. He likes it but
    experiences considerable difficulty in extracting it from his
    throat. The sounds seem to choke him. It is impossible not to
    echo this strange contagious laughter. But it seems to break
    one’s jaws and teeth and to petrify the muscles.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    It was really remarkable. I was fascinated when Cardinal X.
    suddenly cut short his lecture on the Villa Orsini by a fit
    of groaning laughter which left him calm and silent. His thin
    fingers played with his rosary, he remained quiet and gazed
    at me with a mien of deepest reverence and gentle love:
    something akin to tears glistened in his dark eyes. I had
    made an impression upon him. He loved me!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    What was I to do? I gazed into his square, ape-like face.
    Kindliness turned to love, love into passion, and still we
    maintained the silence...another moment and I would have
    stifled him in my embrace!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, here you are in Rome, Mr. Wondergood,” sweetly sang
    the old monkey, without altering his loving gaze.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_69">69</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Here I am in Rome,” I agreed obediently, continuing to gaze
    upon him with the same sinful passion.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And do you know, Mr. Wondergood, why I came here, i.e., in
    addition, of course, to the pleasure I anticipated in making
    your acquaintance?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I thought and with my gaze unchanged, replied:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “For money, Your Eminence?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The Cardinal shook, as though flapping his wings, laughed,
    and slapped his knee—and again lost himself in loving
    contemplation of my nose. This dumb reverence, to which I
    replied with redoubled zest, began to wield a peculiar
    influence upon me. I purposely tell you all this in detail in
    order that you may understand my wish at that moment: to
    begin cavorting about, to sing like a cock, to tell my best
    Arkansas anecdote, or simply to invite His Eminence to remove
    his regalia and play a game of poker!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Your Eminence....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I love Americans, Mr. Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Your Eminence! In Arkansas they tell a story....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Ah, I see, you want to get down to business? I understand
    your impatience. Money matters should never be postponed. Is
    that not so?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It depends entirely upon one’s concern in these matters,
    Your Eminence.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_70">70</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The square face of the Cardinal grew serious, and in his eyes
    there gleamed for a moment a ray of loving reproach:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I hope you are not vexed at my long dissertation, Mr.
    Wondergood. I love so much the history of our great city that
    I could not forego the pleasure...the things you see before
    you are not Rome. There is no Rome, Mr. Wondergood. Once upon
    a time it was the Eternal City, but to-day it is simply a
    large city and the greater it grows the further it is from
    eternity. Where is that great Spirit which once illumined
    it?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I shall not narrate to you all the prattle of this purple
    parrot, his gently-cannibal look, his grimaces and his
    laughter. All that the old shaven monkey told me when it
    finally grew weary was:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Your misfortune is that you love your fellow beings too
    much....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Love your neighbor....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, let neighbors love each other. Go on teaching that but
    why do <em>you</em> want to do it? When one loves too well
    one is blind to the shortcomings of the beloved and still
    worse: one elevates these faults to virtues. How can you
    reform people and make them happy without realizing their
    shortcomings or by ignoring their vices? When one loves, one
    pities and pity is the death of power. You see, I am quite
    frank with

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_71">71</a></span>

    you, Mr. Wondergood, and I
    repeat: love is weakness. Love will get the money out of
    your pocket and will squander it...on rouge! Leave love
    to the lower classes. Let them love each other. Demand it
    of them, but you, you have risen to greater heights,
    gifted with such power!...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But what can I do, Your Eminence? I am at a loss to
    understand it all. From my childhood on, especially in
    church, I have had it drummed into me that one must love his
    neighbor, and I believed it. And so....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The Cardinal grew pensive. Like laughter, pensiveness was
    becoming to him and rendered his square face immovable,
    filling it with dignity and lonely grief. Leaning forward
    with his lips compressed and supporting his chin upon his
    hand, he fixed his sharp, sleepy eyes upon me. There was much
    sorrow in them. He seemed to be waiting for the conclusion of
    my remark, and not having patience to do so, sighed and
    blinked.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Childhood, yes”...he mumbled, still blinking sorrowfully.
    “Children, yes. But you are no longer a child. Forget this
    lesson. You must acquire the heavenly gift of forgetfulness,
    you know.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He gnashed his white teeth and significantly scratched his
    nose with his thin finger, continuing seriously:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_72">72</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But it’s all the same, Mr. Wondergood. You, yourself cannot
    accomplish much.... Yes, yes! One must <em>know</em> people
    to make them happy. Isn’t that your noble aim? But the Church
    alone <em>knows</em> people. She has been a mother and
    teacher for thousands of years. Her <em>experience</em> is
    the only one worth while, and, I may say, the only reliable
    one. As far as I know your career, Mr. Wondergood, you are an
    experienced cattle man. And you know, of course, what
    <em>experience</em> means even in the matter of handling such
    simple creatures as....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “As swine....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He was startled—and suddenly began to bark, to cough, to
    whine: he was laughing again.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Swine? that’s fine, that’s splendid, Mr. Wondergood, but do
    not forget that one finds the devil, too, in swine!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Ceasing his laughter he proceeded:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “In teaching others, we learn ourselves. I do not contend
    that all the methods of education and training employed by
    the Church were equally successful. No, we often made
    mistakes, but every one of our mistakes served to improve our
    methods...we are approaching perfection, Mr. Wondergood, we
    are approaching perfection!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I hinted at the rapid growth of rationalism which, it seemed
    to me, threatened to destroy the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_73">73</a></span>

    “perfection” of the Church, but
    Cardinal X. again flapped his wings and almost screeched
    with laughter.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Rationalism! You are a most talented humorist, Mr.
    Wondergood! Tell me, was not the celebrated Mark Twain a
    countryman of yours? Yes, yes! Rationalism! Just think a
    moment. From what root is this word derived and what does it
    mean—<em>ratio</em>? <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">An nescis,
    mi filis quantilla sapientia
    rigitur orbis?</i> Ah, my dear Wondergood! To speak of
    ratio on this earth is more out of place than it would be
    to speak of a rope in the home of a man who has just been
    hanged!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I watched the old monkey enjoying himself and I enjoyed
    myself too. I studied this mixture of a monkey, parrot,
    penguin, fox, wolf—and what not? And it was really funny: I
    love merry suicides. For a long time we continued our fun at
    the expense of <em>ratio</em> until His Eminence calmed
    himself and assumed the tone of a teacher:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “As anti-Semitism is the Socialism of fools....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And are you familiar...?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I told you we are approaching perfection!... So is
    rationalism the wisdom of fools. The wise man goes further.
    The ratio constitutes the holiday dress of a fool. It is the
    coat he dons in the presence of others, but he really
    lives,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_74">74</a></span>

    sleeps, works, loves and dies without any ratio at all.
    Do you fear death, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I did not feel like replying and remained silent.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You need not feel ashamed, Mr. Wondergood: one should fear
    death. As long as there is <em>death</em>....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The features of the monkey’s face suddenly contracted and in
    his eyes there appeared horror and wrath: as if some one had
    seized him by the back of his neck and thrust him into the
    darkness and terror of a primeval forest. He <em>feared</em>
    death and his terror was dark, evil and boundless. I needed
    no words of explanation and no other evidence: One look upon
    this distorted, befogged and confused <em>human</em> face was
    sufficient to compel reverence for the Great Irrational! And
    how weak is <em>their</em> steadiness: My Wondergood also
    grew pale and cringed...ah, the rogue! He was <em>now</em>
    seeking protection and help from Me!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Will you have some wine, Your Eminence?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But His Eminence was himself again. He curved his thin lips
    into a smile and shook his head in the negative. And suddenly
    he broke out again with surprising fury:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And as long as there is death, the Church is unshakable! Let
    all of you who seek to undermine her, tear her, and blow her
    up—you cannot conquer her. And even if you should succeed in

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_75">75</a></span>

    destroying her, the first to
    perish beneath her ruins would be yourselves. Who will
    then defend you against death? Who will give you sweet
    faith in immortality, in eternal life, in everlasting
    bliss?... Believe me, Mr. Wondergood, the world is not
    seeking your ratio. It is all a misunderstanding!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But what does it seek, Your Eminence?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What does it want? <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">Mundus vult
    decipi</i>...you know our Latin? the world wants to be
    fooled!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And the old monkey again grew merry, begun to wink, to beam
    with satisfaction, slapped his knee and burst into laughter.
    I also laughed. The rascal was so funny!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And is it you,” said I, “who wants to fool it?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The Cardinal again grew serious and replied sadly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The Holy See needs funds, Mr. Wondergood. The world, while
    it has not grown rational, has become weaker in its faith and
    it is somewhat difficult to manage it.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He signed and continued:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are not a Socialist, Mr. Wondergood? Ah, do not be
    ashamed. We are all Socialists now. We are all on the side of
    the hungry: the more satisfied they will be, the more they
    will fear <em>death</em>. You understand?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_76">76</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He flung out his arms and drew them in again, like a net
    filled with fish and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “We are fishermen, Mr. Wondergood, humble fishermen!... And
    tell me: do you regard the desire for <em>liberty</em> as a
    virtue or a vice?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The entire civilized world regards the desire for liberty as
    a virtue,” I replied angrily.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I expected no other reply from a citizen of the United
    States. But don’t you personally believe that he who will
    give man limitless <em>freedom</em> will also bring him
    <em>death</em>? <em>Death</em> alone releases all earthly
    ties. And don’t you regard the words ‘freedom’ and ‘death’ as
    synonymous?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I speak of political liberty.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Of political liberty? Oh, we have no objection to that. You
    can have as much as you please of that! Of course, provided
    men themselves ask for it. Are you sure they really want it?
    If they do, please help yourself! It is all nonsense and
    calumny to say that the Holy See is in favor of reaction....
    I had the honor to be present on the balcony of the Vatican
    when His Holiness blessed the first French aëroplane that
    appeared over Rome, and the next Pope, I am sure, will gladly
    bless the barricades. The time of Galileo has passed, Mr.
    Wondergood, and we all know now that the earth does move!”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_77">77</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He drew a circle in the air with his finger, indicating the
    revolution of the earth.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You must permit me to think over your proposal, Your
    Eminence.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Cardinal X. jumped up from his chair and gently touched my
    shoulder with two of his aristocratic fingers:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, I am not hurrying you, my good Mr. Wondergood. It was
    you who were hurrying me. I am even convinced that you will
    at first refuse me, but when, after some little experience,
    you will have realized the real <em>needs</em> of man.... I,
    too, love man, Mr. Wondergood, to be sure, not so
    passionately and....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He departed with the same grimaces, bearing himself with
    dignity and dispensing blessings all about him. I saw him
    again through the window at the entrance of the palace, while
    the coachman was bringing up the carriage: he was speaking
    into the ear of one of his abbés, whose face resembled a
    black plate. The Cardinal’s countenance no longer reminded me
    of a monkey: it was rather the face of a shaven, hungry,
    tired lion. This able actor needed no dressing room for his
    make-up! Behind him stood a tall lackey, all dressed in
    black, reminding one of an English baronet. Whenever His
    Eminence turned about

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_78">78</a></span>

    in his direction, he would
    respectfully lift his faded silk hat.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="v-indent">
    Following the departure of His Eminence I was surrounded by a
    merry group of friends, with whom I had filled the spare
    rooms of my palace for the purpose of alleviating my
    loneliness and ennui. Toppi looked proud and happy: he was so
    satiated with blessings that he fairly bulged. The artists,
    decorators and others—whatever you call them—were greatly
    impressed by the Cardinal’s visit, and spoke with much glee
    of the remarkable expression of his face and the grandeur of
    his manner! The Pope himself.... But when I remarked with the
    naïveté of a Redskin that he reminded me of a monkey, the
    shrewd canailes burst into loud laughter and one of them
    immediately sketched a portrait of Cardinal X.—in a cage. I
    am not a moralist to judge other people for their petty sins:
    they will get what is due them on their Judgment Day—and I
    was much pleased by the cleverness of the laughing beasts.
    They do not appear to have much faith in <em>love</em> for
    one’s <em>fellow beings</em> and if I should rummage about
    among their drawings, I would probably find a pretty good
    sketch of the ass Wondergood. I like that. I find relief in
    communion with my

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_79">79</a></span>

    little, pleasant sinners, from the babbling of the great and
    disagreeable saints...whose hands are covered with blood.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Then Toppi asked me: “And how much does he want?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “He wants all!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi said with determination:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Don’t you give him all. He promised to make me a prelate,
    but, all the same, don’t you give him all. One should save
    his money.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Every day I have unpleasant experiences with Toppi: people
    are constantly foisting counterfeit coin on him. When they
    first gave him some, he was greatly perturbed and was
    impressed with what I said to him.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You really astonish me, Toppi,” I said, “it is ridiculous
    for an old devil like you to accept counterfeit money from
    human beings, and allow yourself to be fooled. You ought to
    be ashamed of yourself, Toppi. I fear you will make a beggar
    of me.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Now, however, Toppi, entangled in the mesh of the counterfeit
    and the genuine, seeks to preserve both the one and the
    other: he is quite clever in money matters and the Cardinal
    tried in vain to bribe him. Toppi—a prelate!...</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But the shaven monkey does really want my three billions.
    Apparently the belly of the Holy

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_80">80</a></span>

    See is rumbling with hunger. I
    gazed long at the well executed caricature of the Cardinal
    and the longer I gazed, the less I liked it: no, there was
    something missing. The artist had sensed the ridiculous
    pretty well, but I do not see that fire of spite and
    malice which is in constant play beneath the gray ashes of
    terror. The bestial and the human is here, but it is not
    molded into that <em>extraordinary</em> mask which, now
    that a long distance separates me from the Cardinal and I
    no longer hear his heavy laughter, is beginning to
    exercise a most disagreeable influence over me. Or is it
    because the extraordinary is inexpressible through pencil?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    In reality he is a cheap rascal, no better than a plain
    pickpocket, and told me nothing new: he is human enough and
    wise enough to cultivate that contemptuous laughter of his at
    the expense of the rational. But he revealed <em>himself</em>
    to me and do not take offense at my American rudeness, dear
    reader: somewhere behind his broad shoulders, cringing with
    terror, there gleamed also your dear countenance. It was like
    a dream, you understand: it was as if some one were
    strangling you, and you, in stifled voice, cried to heaven:
    Murder! Police! Ah, you do not know that <em>third</em>,
    which is neither life nor death, and I know <em>who</em> it
    was that was strangling you with his bony fingers!

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_81">81</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But do I know? Oh, laugh at him who is laughing at you,
    comrade. I fear your turn is coming to have some fun at my
    expense. Do I know? I came to you from the innermost depths,
    merry and serene, blessed in the consciousness of my
    Immortality.... And I am already hesitating. I am already
    trembling before this shaven monkey’s face which dares to
    express its own low horror in such audaciously grand style:
    Ah, I have not even sold my Immortality: I have simply crushed
    it in my sleep, as does a foolish mother her newborn babe. It
    has simply faded beneath your sun and rains. It has become a
    transparent cloth without design, unfit to cover the
    nakedness of a respectable gentleman! This reeking Wondergood
    swamp in which I am submerged to my eyes, envelops me with
    mire, befogs my consciousness and stifles me with the
    unbearable odors of decay. When do you usually begin to
    decay, my friend: on the second, the third day or does it
    depend upon the climate? I am already in the process of
    decay, and I am nauseated by the odor of my entrails. Or are
    you so used to the work of the <em>worms</em> that you take
    it for the elevation of thought and inspiration?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    My God, I forgot that I may have some fair readers, too! I
    most humbly beg your pardon, worthy folk, for this uncalled
    for discussion of

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_82">82</a></span>

    odors. I am a most unpleasant
    conversationalist, milady, and as a perfumer I am worse...no,
    still worse: I am a disgusting mixture of Satan
    and an American bear, and I know not how to appreciate
    your good taste....</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    No, I am still Satan! I still know that I am immortal and
    when my will shall command me I will strangle myself with my
    own bony fingers. But if I <em>should forget</em>?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Then I shall distribute my wealth among the poor and with
    you, my friend, shall crawl up to the old shaven monkey. I
    shall cling with my American face to his soft slipper,
    emitting blessings. I shall weep. I shall rave with horror:
    “Save me from Death!” And the old monkey, brushing the hair
    from his face, reclining comfortably, gleaming with a holy
    light, illuminating all about it—and itself trembling with
    fear and horror—will hastily continue to fool the world, the
    world which so loves to be fooled!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But I am jesting. I wish to be serious now. I like Cardinal
    X. and I shall permit him to begild himself with my gold. I
    am weary. I must sleep. My bed and Wondergood await me. I
    shall extinguish the light and in the darkness I shall listen
    for a moment to the clicking of the counting machine within
    my breast. And then will come the great pianist, a drunken
    genius, and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_83">83</a></span>

    begin drumming upon the black
    keys of my brain. He knows everything and has forgotten
    everything, this ingenious drunkard, and confuses the most
    inspiring landscapes with a swamp.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    That is—a dream.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_84">84</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      February 22.<br/>
      Rome, Villa Orsini.</p></div>
<p class="v1">
<span class="dropcap">M</span>agnus was not at home. I
    was received by Maria.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    A glorious peace has suddenly descended upon me. In wondrous
    calm I breathe at this moment. Like a schooner, its sails
    lowered, I doze in the midday heat of the slumbering ocean.
    Not a stir. Not a ripple. I fear to move or to open wide my
    eyes, dazzled by the rays of the sun. I breathe silently, and
    I would not rouse the slightest wave upon the boundless
    smoothness of the sea. And quietly I lay down my pen.</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      February 23.<br/>
      Villa Orsini.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    Thomas Magnus was not at home and, to my great surprise, I
    was received by Maria.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I do not suppose you would be interested in how I greeted her
    and what I mumbled in the first few moments of our meeting. I
    can only say that I

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_85">85</a></span>

    mumbled and that I felt a
    strong impulse to laugh. I could not lift my eyes to gaze
    upon Maria until my thoughts cast off their soiled garb
    and donned clean attire. As you see, I did not lose
    consciousness altogether! But in vain did I take these
    precautions: <em>that</em> torture did not follow. Maria’s
    gaze was clear and simple and it contained neither
    searching, penetrating fire nor fatal forgiveness. It was
    calm and clear, like the sky of the Campagna and—I do not
    know how it happened—it penetrated my entire being.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    She met me in the garden. We sat down by the gate, from which
    vantage point we had a good view of the Campagna. When you
    gaze at the Campagna you cannot prattle nonsense. No, it was
    she who gazed at the Campagna and I gazed into her eyes—clear
    to the seventh sky, where you end the count of your heavens.
    We were silent or—if you regard the following as
    conversation—we spoke:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Are those mountains?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, those are the mountains of Albania. And there—is
    Tivoli.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    She picked out little white houses in the distance and
    pointed them out to me and I felt a peculiar calm and joy in
    Maria’s gaze. The suspicious resemblance of Maria to the
    Madonna no longer troubled me: how can I possibly be troubled
    by

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_86">86</a></span>

    the fact that you resemble
    <em>yourself</em>? And came a moment when a great peace
    of mind descended upon <em>me</em>. I have no words of
    comparison whereby to reveal to you that great and bright
    calm.... I am forever conjuring up before me that accursed
    schooner with its lowered sails, on which I never really
    sailed, for I am afraid of seasickness! Or is it because
    on this night of my loneliness, my road is being
    illuminated by the <em>Star of the Seas</em>? Well, yes,
    I was a schooner, if you so desire it, and if this is not
    agreeable to you I was <em>All</em>. Besides I was
    <em>Nothing</em>. You see what nonsense emerges out of
    all this talk when Wondergood begins to seek words and
    comparisons.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I was so calm that I even soon began to gaze into Maria’s
    eyes: I simply <em>believed</em> them. This is deeper than
    mere gazing. When necessary I shall find those eyes again. In
    the meantime I shall remain a schooner with sails lowered. I
    shall be <em>All</em> and I shall be <em>Nothing</em>. Only
    once did a slight breeze stir my sails, but only for a
    moment: that was when Maria pointed out the Tiberian road to
    me, cutting the green hills like a white thread, and asked
    whether I had ever traversed it before.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, occasionally, Signorina.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I often gaze upon this road and think that it

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_87">87</a></span>

    must be extremely pleasant to
    traverse it by automobile.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Have you a swift car, Signor?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, yes, Signorina, very swift! But those,” I continued in
    gentle reproach, “who are themselves limitless distances and
    endlessness are in no need of any movement.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Maria and an automobile! A winged angel entering a trolley
    car for the sake of speed! A swallow riding on a turtle! An
    arrow on the humpy back of a hod carrier! Ah, all comparisons
    lie: why speak of swallows and arrows, why speak of any
    movement for Maria, who embraces all distances! But it is
    only now that I thought of the trolley and the turtle. At
    that time I felt so calm and peaceful, I was deep in such
    bliss that I could think of nothing except that countenance
    of eternity and undying light!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    A great calm came upon Me on that day and nothing could
    disturb my endless bliss. It was not long before Thomas
    Magnus returned, and a flying fish, gleaming for a moment
    above the ocean, could no more disturb its blue smoothness
    than did Magnus disturb me. I <em>received</em> him into my
    heart. I swallowed him calmly and felt no heavier burden in
    my stomach than a whale does after swallowing a herring. It
    was gratifying to find Magnus hospitable and merry. He
    pressed

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_88">88</a></span>

    my hand and his eyes were
    bright and kind. Even his face seemed less pale and not as
    weary as usual.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I was invited to breakfast...lest it worry you, let me say
    right now that I remained until late in the evening. When
    Maria had retired I told Magnus of the visit of Cardinal X.
    His merry face darkened slightly and in his eyes appeared his
    former hostile flame.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Cardinal X.? He <em>came</em> to see you?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I narrated to him in detail my conversation with “the shaven
    monkey,” and remarked that he had impressed me as a scoundrel
    of no small caliber. Magnus frowned and said sternly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You laugh in vain, Mr. Wondergood. I have long known
    Cardinal X. and...I have been keeping a close eye on him.
    He is evil, cruel and dangerous. Despite his ridiculous
    exterior, he is as cunning, merciless and revengeful as
    Satan!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And you, too, Magnus! Like Satan! This blue-faced, shaven
    orang-outang, this caressing gorilla, this monkey cavorting
    before a looking-glass! But I have exhausted my capacity for
    insult. Magnus’ remark fell like a stone to the bottom of my
    bliss. I listened further:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “His flirting with the Socialists, his jokes at the expense
    of Galileo are all lies. Just as the enemies of Cromwell
    hanged him after his death,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_89">89</a></span>

    so would Cardinal X. burn the bones of Galileo
    with immense satisfaction: to this day he
    regards the movement of the earth as a personal affront.
    It is an old school, Mr. Wondergood; he will stop at
    nothing to overcome obstacles, be it poison or murder,
    which he will take care to attribute to the misfortune of
    accident. You smile but I cannot discuss the Vatican
    smilingly, not so long as it contains such...and it will
    always produce some one like Cardinal X. Look out, Mr.
    Wondergood: You have landed within the sphere of his
    vision and interests, and, let me assure you, that scores
    of eyes are now watching you...perhaps me, too. Be on
    your guard, my friend!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus was quite excited. Fervently I shook his hand:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Ah, Magnus!... But when will you agree to help me?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But you know that I do not like human beings. It is
    <em>you</em> who loves them Mr. Wondergood, not I.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    A gleam of irony appeared in his eyes.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The Cardinal says that it is not at all necessary to love
    people in order to be happy.... The contrary, he says!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And who told you that I want to make people happy? Again, it
    is <em>you</em> who wants to do that,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_90">90</a></span>

    not I. Hand over your billions
    to Cardinal X. His recipe for happiness is not worse than
    other patent medicines. To be sure, his recipe has one
    disadvantage: while dispensing <em>happiness</em> it
    destroys <em>people</em>...but is that important? You
    are too much of a business man, Mr. Wondergood, and I see
    that you are not sufficiently familiar with the world of
    our inventors of the Best Means for the Happiness of
    Mankind: These means are more numerous than the so-called
    best tonics for the growth of hair. I myself was a dreamer
    at one time and invented one or two in my youth...but I
    was short on chemistry and badly singed my hair in an
    explosion. I am very glad I did not come across your
    billions in <em>those</em> days. I am joking, Mr.
    Wondergood, but if you wish to be serious, here is my
    answer: keep on growing and multiplying your hogs, make
    four of your three billions, continue selling your
    conserves, provided they are not too rotten, and cease
    worrying about the happiness of Mankind. As long as the
    world likes good ham it will not deny you its love and
    admiration!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And how about those who have no means to buy ham?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What do you care about them? It is their belly—pardon me for
    the expression—that is rumbling with hunger, not yours. I
    congratulate

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_91">91</a></span>

    you upon your new home: I know
    the Villa Orsini very well. It is a magnificent relic of
    Old Rome.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I balked at the prospect of another lecture on my palace!
    Yes, Magnus had again shoved me aside. He did it brusquely
    and roughly. But his voice lacked sternness and he gazed at
    me softly and kindly. Well, what of it? To the devil with
    humanity, its happiness and its ham! I shall try later to
    bore an entrance into Magnus’ brain. In the meantime leave me
    alone with my great peace and...Maria. Boundless peace
    and...Satan!—isn’t that a splendid touch in my play? And what
    kind of a liar is he who can fool only others? To lie to
    oneself and believe it—that is an art!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    After breakfast all <em>three</em> of us walked over the
    downy hills and slopes of the Campagna. It was still early
    Spring and only little white flowers gently brightened the
    young, green earth. A soft breeze diffused the scents of the
    season, while little houses gleamed in distant Albano. Maria
    walked in front of us, stopping now and then and casting her
    heavenly eyes upon everything they could envisage. When I
    return to Rome I shall order my brush-pusher to paint Madonna
    thus: On a carpet of soft green and little white flowers.
    Magnus was so frank and merry that I again drew his attention
    to Maria’s resemblance to the Madonna

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_92">92</a></span>

    and told him of the
    miserable brush-pushers in search of a model. He laughed,
    agreed with me in my opinion of the aforementioned
    resemblance, and grew wistful.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It is a <em>fatal</em> resemblance, Mr. Wondergood. You
    remember that heavy moment when I spoke to you of
    <em>blood</em>? Already there is blood at the feet of
    Maria...the blood of one noble youth whose memory Maria and
    I cherish. There are fatal faces, there are fatal
    <em>resemblances</em> which confuse our souls and lead to the
    abyss of self destruction. I am the father of Maria, and yet
    I myself hardly dare to touch her brow with my lips. What
    insurmountable barriers does love raise for itself when it
    dares to lift its eyes upon Maria?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    This was the only moment of that happy day when my ocean
    became overcast with heavy clouds, as tangled as the beard of
    “Mad King Lear,” while a wild wind shook the sails of my
    schooner. But I lifted my eyes to Maria, I met her gaze. It
    was bright and calm, like the sky above us—and the wild wind
    disappeared without trace, bearing away with it fragments of
    the darkness. I do not know whether you understand these sea
    comparisons, which I consider quite inadequate. Let me
    explain: I again grew quite calm. What is that noble Roman
    youth to me,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_93">93</a></span>

    who himself unable to find
    <em>comparisons</em> was hurled over the head of his
    Pegasus? I am a white-winged schooner and beneath me is an
    entire ocean, and was it not written of Her: the
    <em>Incomparable</em>?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The day was long and quiet and I was charmed with the
    precision with which the sun rolled down from its height to
    the rim of the earth, with the measured pace with which the
    stars covered the heavens, the large stars first, then the
    little ones, until the whole sky sparkled and gleamed. Slowly
    grew the darkness. Then came the rosy moon, at first somewhat
    rusty, then brilliant, and swam majestically over the road
    made free and warm by the sun. But more than anything else
    did I and Magnus feel charmed when we sat in the
    half-darkened room and heard Maria: she played the harp and
    sang.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And listening to the strains of the harp I realized why man
    likes music produced by taut strings: I was myself a taut
    string and even when the finger no longer touched me, the
    sound continued to vibrate and died so slowly that I can
    still hear it in the depths of my soul. And suddenly I saw
    that the entire air was filled with taut and trembling
    strings: they extend from star to star, scatter themselves
    over the earth and penetrate my heart...like a network of
    telephone

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_94">94</a></span>

    wires through a central
    station,—if you want more simple comparisons. And there
    was <em>something else</em> I understood when I heard
    <em>Maria’s</em> voice....</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    No, you are simply an animal, Wondergood! When I recall your
    loud complaints against love and its songs, cursed with the
    curse of monotony—is that not your own expression?—I feel
    like sending you off to a barn. You are a dull and dirty
    animal and I am ashamed that for a whole hour I listened to
    your silly bellowing. You may hold words in contempt, you may
    curse your embraces, but do not touch Love, my friend: only
    through love has it been given to you to obtain a glimpse
    into Eternity! Away, my friend! Leave Satan to himself, he
    who in the very blackest depths of man has suddenly come upon
    new and unexpected flames. Away! You must not see the
    <em>joy</em> and <em>astonishment</em> of Satan!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The hour was late. The moon indicated midnight when I left
    Magnus and ordered the chauffeur to drive by way of the
    Numentinian road: I feared lest this great calm might slip
    away from me, and I wanted to overtake it in the depths of
    the Campagna. But the speed of the car broke the silence and
    I left my machine. It went to sleep at once beneath the light
    of the moon over its own shadow and looked like a huge,
    gray

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_95">95</a></span>

    stone barring the road. For the
    last time its lights gleamed upon Me and it became
    transformed into something invisible. I was left alone
    with my shadow.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We walked along the white road, I and my shadow, stopping
    occasionally and then again resuming our march. I sat down on
    a stone along the road and the black shadow hid behind my
    back. And here a great quiet descended upon the earth, upon
    the world. Upon my chilled brow I felt the cool touch of the
    moon’s kiss.</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      March 2.<br/>
      Rome, Villa Orsini.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    I pass my days in deep solitude. My earthly existence is
    beginning to trouble me. With every hour I seem to
    <em>forget</em> what I have left behind the wall of
    <em>human</em> things. My <em>eyesight</em> is weakening. I
    can hardly see behind that wall. The shadows behind it
    scarcely move and I can no longer distinguish their outline.
    With every second my sense of <em>hearing</em> grows duller.
    I hear the quiet squeak of a mouse, fussing beneath the floor
    but I am deaf to the thunders rolling above my head. The
    silence of delusion envelops me and I desperately strain my
    ears to catch the voices of frankness. I left them behind
    that impenetrable

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_96">96</a></span>

    wall. With each moment
    <em>Truth</em> flees from Me. In vain my words try to
    overtake it: they merely shoot by. In vain I seek to
    surround it in the tight embraces of my thoughts and rivet
    it with chains: the prison disappears like air and my
    embraces envelop nothing but emptiness. Only yesterday it
    seemed to me that I had caught my prey. I imprisoned it
    and fastened it to the wall with a heavy chain, but when I
    came to view it in the morning—I found nothing but a
    shackled skeleton. The rusty chains dangled loosely from
    its neck while the skull was nodding to me in brazen
    laughter.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    You see, I am again seeking comparisons, only to have the
    <em>Truth</em> escape me! But what can I do when I have left
    all my weapons at <em>home</em> and must resort to your poor
    arsenal? Let God himself don this human form and He will
    immediately begin to speak to you in exquisite French or
    Yiddish and He will be unable to say <em>more</em> than it is
    possible to say in exquisite French or Yiddish. God! And I am
    only Satan, a modest, careless, human Devil!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Of course, it was careless of me. But when I looked upon
    <em>your human</em> life from <em>beyond</em>...no, wait:
    You and I have just been caught in a lie, old man! When I
    said from <em>Beyond</em> you understood at once it must have
    been very far

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_97">97</a></span>

    away. Yes? You may have already
    determined, perhaps, the approximate number of miles. Have
    you not at your disposal a limitless number of zeros? Ah,
    it is not true. My “<em>Beyond</em> ” is as close as your
    “<em>Here</em>, ” and is no further away than
    <em>this</em> very spot. You see what nonsense, what a lie
    you and I are pirouetting about! Cast away your meter and
    your scales and only listen as if behind your back there
    were no ticking of a clock and in your breast there were
    no counting machine. And so: when I looked upon your life
    from <em>Beyond</em> it appeared to Me a great and merry
    game of immortal fragments.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Do you know what a puppets’ show is? When one doll breaks,
    its place is taken by another, but the play goes on. The
    music is not silenced, the auditors continue to applaud and
    it is all very interesting. Does the spectator concern
    himself about the fate of the fragments, thrust upon the
    scrap heap? He simply looks on in enjoyment. So it was with
    me, too. I heard the beat of the drums, and watched the
    antics of the clowns. And I so love immortal play that I felt
    like becoming an actor myself. Ah, I did not know then that
    it is not a <em>play</em> at all. And that the scrap heap was
    terrible when one becomes a puppet himself and that the
    broken fragments reeked with blood. You deceived me, my
    friend!

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_98">98</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But you are astonished. You knit your brow in contempt and
    ask: Who is this Satan who does not <em>know</em> such
    <em>simple</em> things? You are accustomed to respect the
    Devil. You listen to the commonest dog as if he were speaking
    ex cathedra. You have surrendered to me your last dollar as
    if I were a professor of white and black magic and suddenly I
    reveal myself an ignoramus in the most elementary matters! I
    understand your disappointment. I myself have grown to
    respect mediums and cards. I am ashamed to confess that I
    cannot perform a single trick or kill a bedbug by simply
    casting my eye upon it, but even with my finger. But what
    matters most to me is truth: Yes, I did not know your
    <em>simplest</em> things! Apparently the blame for this is
    for that <em>divide</em> which separates us. Just as you do
    not know <em>my</em> real Name and cannot pronounce a simple
    thing like that, so I did not know <em>yours</em>, my
    earthly shadow, and only now, in great ecstasy do I begin to
    grasp the wealth that is in you. Think of it: such a simple
    matter as counting I had to learn from Wondergood. I would
    not even be able to button my attire if it were not for the
    experienced and dexterous fingers of that fine chap
    Wondergood!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Now I am human, like you. The limited sensation of my being I
    regard as my <em>knowledge</em> and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_99">99</a></span>

    with respect I now touch my own
    nose, when necessity arises: it is not merely a nose—it is
    an axiom! I am now myself a struggling doll in a theater
    of marionettes. My porcelain head moves to the right and
    to the left. My hands move up and down. I am merry, I am
    gay. I am at play. I know everything...except: whose
    hand it is that pulls the string behind Me. And in the
    distance I can see the scrap heap from which protrude two
    little feet clad in ball slippers....</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    No, this is not the <em>play</em> of the <em>Immortal</em>
    that I sought. It no more resembles merriment than do the
    convulsions of an epileptic a good negro dance! Here any one
    is what he is and here every one seeks not to be what he is.
    And it is this endless process of fraud that I mistook for a
    merry theater: what a mistake, how silly it was of “almighty,
    immortal”...Satan! Here every one is dragging every one
    else to court: the living are dragging the dead, the dead—the
    living. The history of the former is the history of the
    latter. And God, too, is History! And this endless nonsense,
    this dirty stream of false witnesses, of perjurers, of false
    judges and false scoundrels I mistook for the <em>play</em>
    of immortals! Or have I landed in the <em>wrong</em> place?
    Tell Me, stranger: whither does <em>this</em> road lead? You
    are pale. Your

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_100">100</a></span>

    trembling finger points in
    the direction of...ah, the scrap heap!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yesterday, I questioned Toppi about his former life, the
    first time he donned the human form: I wanted to know how a
    doll feels when its head is cracking and the thread which
    moves it is severed. We lit our pipes and with steins of beer
    before us, like two good Germans, we ventured into the realm
    of philosophy. It developed, however, that this numbskull has
    <em>forgotten</em> everything and my questions only confused
    him.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Is it possible that you have really forgotten everything,
    Toppi!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Wait till you die and you will learn all about it yourself.
    I do not like to think of it. What good is it?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Then it is not good?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And have you ever heard of any one praising it?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Quite true. No one has yet showered praises upon it.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And no one will, I know!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We sat silent.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And do you remember, Toppi, whence you have come?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “From Illinois,—the same place you come from.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, I am speaking of <em>something else</em>. Do
    you

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_101">101</a></span>

    remember whence you came? Do
    you recollect your real Name?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi looked at me strangely, paled slightly and proceeded to
    clean his pipe. Then he arose and without lifting his eyes,
    said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I beg you not to speak to me <em>thus</em>, Mr. Wondergood.
    I am an honest citizen of the United States and I do not
    understand your insinuations.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But he remembers. Not in vain did he grow pale. He is seeking
    to forget and will forget soon enough! This double play of
    earth and heaven is too much for him and he has surrendered
    entirely to the earth! There will come a time when he will
    take me off to an insane asylum or betray me to Cardinal X.
    if I dare to speak to him of Satan.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I respect you, Toppi. You are quite a man,” I said and
    kissed his brow: I always kiss the brow of people I love.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Again I departed for the green Campagna desert: I follow the
    best models: when I am ill at ease I go into the desert.
    There I called for Satan and cursed his name but he would
    not answer me. I lay there long in the dust, pleading, when
    from somewhere in the depths of the desert I heard the muffled
    tread of feet, and a bright light helped Me to arise. And
    again I saw the Eden I had left behind, its green tents and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_102">102</a></span>

    unfading sunrise, its quiet
    lights upon the placid waters. And again I <em>heard</em>
    the silent murmurs of lips born of Immaculate Conception
    while toward my eyes I saw approaching Truth. And I
    stretched out my hands to Her and pleaded: Give me back my
    liberty!—</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “<em>Maria!</em> ”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Who called: Maria? Satan again departed, the lights upon the
    placid waters were extinguished and Truth, frightened,
    disappeared—and again I sit upon the earth wearing my human
    form and gazing dully upon the painted world. And on my knees
    rested my shackled hands.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Maria!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    ...It is painful for me to admit that all this is really an
    invention: the coming of Satan with his “light and ringing
    step,” the gardens of Eden and my shackled hands. But I
    needed your attention and I could not get it without these
    gardens of Eden and these chains, the two extremes of your
    life. The gardens of Eden—how beautiful! Chains—how terrible!
    Moreover, all this talk is much more entertaining than merely
    squatting on a hill, cigar in one’s <em>free</em> hand,
    thinking lazily and yawning while awaiting the arrival of the
    chauffeur. And as far as <em>Maria</em> is concerned, I
    brought her into the situation because from afar I could see
    the black cypress trees

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_103">103</a></span>

    above the Magnus home. An
    involuntary association of ideas...you understand.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Can a man with such sight really see Satan? Can a person of
    such dull <em>ear</em> hear the so-called “murmurs” born of
    Immaculate Conception? Nonsense! And, please, I beg of you,
    call Me just Wondergood. Call me just Wondergood until the
    day when I crack my skull open with that plaything which
    opens the <em>most narrow</em> door into <em>limitless</em>
    space. Call me just Henry Wondergood, of Illinois: you will
    find that I will respond promptly and obligingly.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But if, some day, you should find my head crushed, examine
    carefully its <em>fragments</em> : there, in red ink will be
    engraved the proud name of Satan! Bend thy head, in reverence
    and bow to him—but do not do me the honor of accompanying my
    fragments to the scrap heap: one should never bow so
    respectfully to chains cast off!</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      March 9, 1914.<br/>
      Rome, Villa Orsini.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    Last night I had an important conversation with Thomas
    Magnus. When Maria had retired I began as usual to prepare to
    return home but Magnus detained me.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Why go, Mr. Wondergood? Stay here for

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_104">104</a></span>

    the night. Stay here and
    listen to the barking of Mars!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    For several days dense clouds had been gathering over Rome
    and a heavy rain had been beating down upon its walls and
    ruins. This morning I read in a newspaper a very portentous
    weather bulletin: <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">cielo nuvolo
    il vento forte e mare molto
    agitato.</i> Toward evening the threat turned into a storm
    and the enraged sea hurled across a range of ninety miles
    its moist odors upon the walls of Rome. And the real Roman
    sea, the billowy Campagna, sang forth with all the voices
    of the tempest, like the ocean, and at moments it seemed
    that its immovable hills, its ancient waves, long
    evaporated by the sun, had once more come to life and
    moved forward upon the city walls. Mad Mars, this creator
    of terror and tempest, flew like an arrow across its wide
    spaces, crushed the head of every blade of grass to the
    ground, sighed and panted and hurled heavy gusts of wind
    into the whining cypress trees. Occasionally he would
    seize and hurl the nearest objects he could lay his hands
    upon: the brick roofs of the houses shook beneath his
    blows and their stone walls roared as if inside the very
    stones the imprisoned wind was gasping and seeking an
    escape.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We listened to the storm all evening. Maria was calm but
    Magnus was visibly nervous, constantly

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_105">105</a></span>

    rubbed his white hands
    and listened intently to the antics of the wind: to its
    murderous whistle, its roar and its signs, its laughter
    and its groans...the wild-haired artist was cunning
    enough to be slayer and victim, to strangle and to plead
    for mercy at one and the same time! If Magnus had the
    moving ears of an animal, they would have remained
    immovable. His thin nose trembled, his dim eyes grew dark,
    as if they reflected the shadows of the clouds, his thin
    lips were twisted into a quick and strange smile. I, too,
    was quite excited: it was the first time since I became
    human I had heard such a storm and it raised in me a white
    terror: almost with the horror of a child I avoided the
    windows, beyond which lay the night. Why does it not come
    here, I thought: can the window pane possibly keep it out
    if it should wish to break through?...</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Some one knocked at the iron gates several times, the gates
    at which I and Toppi once knocked for admission.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “That is my chauffeur, who has come to fetch me,” said I: “we
    must admit him.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus glanced at me from the corner of his eye and remarked
    sadly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “There is no road on that side of the house. There is nothing
    but field there. That is mad Mars who is begging for
    admittance.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_106">106</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And as if he had actually heard his words, Mars broke out
    into laughter and disappeared whistling. But the knocking was
    soon resumed. It seemed as if some one were tearing off the
    iron gates and several voices, shouting and interrupting each
    other, were anxiously speaking; an infant was heard weeping.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Those must be people who have lost their way...you hear—an
    infant! We must open the gates.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, we’ll see,” said Magnus angrily.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I will go with you, Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Sit still, Wondergood. This friend of mine, here, is quite
    enough....” He quickly drew <em>that</em> revolver from the
    table drawer and with a peculiar expression of love and even
    gentleness he grasped it in his broad hand and carefully hid
    it in his pocket. He walked out and we could hear the cry
    that met him at the gate.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    On that evening I somehow avoided Maria’s eyes and I felt
    quite ill at ease when we were left alone. And suddenly I
    felt like sinking to the floor, and kneeling before her so
    that her dress might touch my face: I felt as if I had hair
    on my back, that sparks would at any moment begin to fly if
    some one were to touch it and that this would relieve me.
    Thus, in my mind, I moved closer and closer to Her, when
    Magnus returned and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_107">107</a></span>

    silently put the revolver
    back into the drawer. The voices at the door had ceased
    and the knocking, too.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Who was that?”...asked Maria.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus angrily shook off the drops of rain upon his coat.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Crazy Mars. Who else did you expect?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But I thought I heard you speak to him?” I jested, trying to
    conceal the shiver produced by the cold brought in by Magnus.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, I told him it was not polite—to drag about with him such
    suspicious company. He excused himself and said he would
    come no more,” Magnus laughed and added: “I am convinced that
    all the murderers of Rome and the Campagna are to-night
    threatening to ambush people and hugging their stilettos as
    if they were their sweethearts....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Again came a muffled and timid knock.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Again!” cried Magnus, angrily, as if Mad Mars had really
    promised to knock no more. But the knock was followed by the
    ring of a bell: it was my chauffeur. Maria retired, while I,
    as I have already said, had been invited by Magnus to remain
    overnight, to which I agreed, after some hesitation: I was
    not at all taken by Magnus and his revolver, and still less
    was I attracted by the silly darkness.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_108">108</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The kind host himself went out to dismiss the chauffeur.
    Through the window I could see the bright lights of the
    lanterns of the machine and for a moment I yearned to return
    home to my pleasant sinners, who were probably imbibing their
    wine at that moment in expectation of my return.... Ah, I
    have long since abandoned philanthropy and am now leading the
    life of a drunkard and a gambler. And again, as on that first
    night, the quiet little white house, this <em>soul</em> of
    Maria, looked terrible and suspicious: this revolver, these
    stains of <em>blood</em> upon the white hands...and, maybe
    there are more stains like these here.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But it was too late to change my mind. The machine had gone
    and Magnus, by the light, had not a <em>blue</em>, but a
    very black and beautiful beard and his eyes were smiling
    pleasantly. In his broad hand he carried not a weapon, but
    two bottles of wine, and from afar he shouted merrily:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “On a night like this there is but one thing to do, to drink
    wine. Even Mars, when I spoke to him, looked drunk to
    me...the rogue! Your glass, Mr. Wondergood!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But when the glasses had been filled, this merry drunkard
    hardly touched the wine and sitting deep in his chair asked
    me to drink and to talk. Without particular enthusiasm,
    listening to the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_109">109</a></span>

    noise of the wind and
    thinking about the length of the night before us, I told
    Magnus of the new and insistent visits of Cardinal X. It
    seemed to me that the Cardinal had actually put spies on
    my trail and what is more strange: he has managed to gain
    quite an influence over the unbribable Toppi. Toppi is
    still the same devoted friend of mine but he seems to have
    grown sad, goes to confessional every day and is trying to
    persuade me to accept Catholicism.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus listened calmly to my story and with still greater
    reluctance I told him of the many unsuccessful efforts to
    open my purse: of the endless petitions, badly written, in
    which the truth appears to be falsehood because of the
    boresome monotony of tears, bows and naïve flattery; of crazy
    inventors, of all sorts of people with hasty projects,
    gentlemen who seek to utilize as quickly as possible their
    temporary absence from jail—of all this hungry mass of
    humanity aroused by the smell of <em>weakly</em> protected
    billions. My secretaries—there are six of them now—hardly
    manage to handle all this mess of tears on paper, and the
    madly babbling fools who fill the doors of my palace.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I fear that I will have to build me an underground exit:
    they are watching me even at nights. They are aiming at me
    with picks and shovels, as

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_110">110</a></span>

    if they were in the Klondike.
    The nonsense published by these accursed newspapers about
    the billions I am ready to give away to every fool
    displaying a wound in his leg, or an empty pocket, has
    driven them out of their senses. I believe that some night
    they will divide me into portions and eat me. They are
    organizing regular pilgrimages to my palace and come with
    huge bags. My ladies, who regard me as their property,
    have found for me a little Dante Inferno, where we take
    daily walks in company with the society that storms my
    place. Yesterday we examined an old witch whose entire
    worth consists in the fact that she has outlived her
    husband, her children and her grandchildren, and is now in
    need of snuff. And some angry old man refused to be
    consoled and even would not take any money until all of us
    had smelled the old putrid wound in his foot. It was
    indeed a horrible odor. This cross old fellow is the pride
    of my ladies, and like all favorites, he is capricious,
    and temperamental. And...are you tired of listening to
    me, Magnus. I could tell you of a whole flock of ragged
    fathers, hungry children, green and rotten like certain
    kinds of cheese, of noble geniuses who despise me like a
    negro, of clever drunkards with merry, red noses.... My
    ladies are not very keen on drunkards, but I love them
    better than any other

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_111">111</a></span>

    kind of goods. And how do you
    feel about it, Signor Magnus?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus was silent. I too was tired of talking. Mad Mars alone
    continued his antics: he was now ensconced upon the roof,
    trying to bite a hole in the center, and crushing the tiles
    as he would a lump of sugar. Magnus broke the silence:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The newspapers seem to have little to say about you
    recently. What is the matter?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I pay the interviewers not to write anything. At first I
    drove them away but they began interviewing my horses and now
    I pay them for their silence by the line. Have you a customer
    for my villa, Magnus? I shall sell it together with the
    artists and the rest of its paraphernalia.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We again grew silent and paced up and down the room: Magnus
    rose first and then sat down. I followed and sat down too. In
    addition, I drank two more glasses of wine while Magnus drank
    none.... His nose is never red. Suddenly he said with
    determination:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do not drink any more wine, Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, very well. I want no more wine. Is that all?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus continued to question me at long intervals. His voice
    was sharp and stern, while mine was...melodious, I would
    say.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_112">112</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “There has been a great change in you, Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Quite possible, thank you, Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “There used to be more life in you. Now you rarely jest. You
    have become very morose, Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You have even grown thin and your brow is sallow. Is it true
    that you get drunk every night in the company of
    your...friends?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It seems so.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “...that you play cards, squander your gold, and that
    recently some one had been nearly murdered at your table?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I fear that is true. I recollect that one gentleman actually
    tried to pierce another gentleman with his fork. And how do
    you know all about that?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He replied sternly and significantly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Toppi was here yesterday. He wanted to see...Maria but I
    myself received him. With all due respect to you, Wondergood,
    I must say that your secretary is unusually stupid.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I acquiesced coldly.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are quite right. You should have driven him out.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I must say for my part, that my last two glasses of wine
    evaporated from me at the mention of

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_113">113</a></span>
<em>Maria’s</em> name, and
    our attempted conversation was marked by continued
    evaporation of the wine I drank, like perfume out of a
    bottle. I have always regarded wine as unreliable matter.
    We found ourselves again listening to the storm and I
    remarked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The wind seems to be growing more violent, Signor Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, the wind seems to be growing more violent, Mr.
    Wondergood. But you must admit that I warned you beforehand,
    Mr. Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Of what did you warn me beforehand, Signor Magnus?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He seized his knees with his white hands and directed upon me
    the gaze of a snake charmer.... Ah, he did not know that I
    myself had extracted my poisoned teeth and was quite
    harmless, like a mummy in a museum! Finally, he realized that
    there was no use beating about the bush, and came straight to
    the point:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I warned you in regard to <em>Maria</em>, ” he said slowly,
    with peculiar insinuation. “You remember that I did not
    desire your acquaintance and expressed it plainly enough? You
    have not forgotten <em>what</em> I told you about Maria, of
    her fatal influence upon the soul? But you were bold and
    insistent and I yielded. And now you ask us—me and my
    daughter—to view the highly exhilarating

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_114">114</a></span>

    spectacle of a gentleman
    in the process of disintegration, one who asks nothing,
    who reproaches no one, but can find no solace until every
    one has smelled his wound.... I do not want to repeat your
    expression, Mr. Wondergood. It has a bad odor. Yes, sir,
    you have spoken quite frankly of your...neighbors and I
    am sincerely glad you have finally abandoned this cheap
    play at love and humanity.... You have so many other
    pastimes! I confess, however, that I am not at all
    overjoyed at your intention of presenting to <em>us</em>
    the <em>sediment</em> of a gentleman. It seems to me, sir,
    that you made a mistake in leaving America and your...canning
    business: dealing with people requires quite a
    different sort of ability.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He laughed! He was almost driving Me out, this little man,
    and I, who write my “I” in a super-capital, I listened to him
    humbly and meekly. It was divinely ridiculous! Here is
    another detail for those who love the ridiculous: before his
    tirade began my eyes and the cigar between my teeth were
    quite bravely and nonchalantly directed toward the ceiling,
    but they changed their attitude before he had finished.... To
    this very moment I feel the taste of that miserable dangling,
    extinguished cigar. I was choking with laughter...that is I
    did not yet know

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_115">115</a></span>

    whether to choke with
    laughter or with wrath. Or, without choking at all, to ask
    him for an umbrella and leave. Ah, he was at <em>home</em>,
    he was on his <em>own</em> ground, this angry, black
    bearded man. He knew how to manage himself in this
    situation and he sang a <em>solo</em>, not a
    <em>duet</em>, like the inseparable Satan of Eternity and
    Wondergood of Illinois!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Sir!” I said with dignity: “There seems to be a sad
    misunderstanding here. You see before you Satan in <em>human
    form</em>...you understand? He went out for an evening
    stroll and was lost in the forest...in the forest, sir, in
    the forest! Won’t you be good enough, sir, to direct him to
    the nearest road to Eternity? Ah, Ah! Thank you. <em>So</em>
    I thought myself. Farewell!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Of course, I really did not say that. I was <em>silent</em>
    and gave the floor to Wondergood. And this is what that
    respectable gentleman said, dropping his wet, dead cigar:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The devil take it! You are quite right, Magnus. Thank you,
    old man. Yes, you warned me quite honestly, but I preferred
    to play a lone hand. Now I am a bankrupt and at your mercy. I
    shall have no objection if you should order the removal of
    the <em>sediment</em> of the gentleman.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I thought that without waiting for a stretcher, Magnus would
    simply throw the sediment out of the window, but his
    generosity proved quite surprising:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_116">116</a></span>

    he looked at Me with
    pity and even stretched out his hand.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are suffering very much, Mr. Wondergood?”—a question
    quite difficult to answer for the celebrated <em>duet</em>!
    I blinked and shrugged my shoulders. This appeared to satisfy
    Magnus and for a few moments we were both silent. I do not
    know of what Magnus was thinking. I thought of nothing: I
    simply examined with great interest, the walls, the ceiling,
    books, pictures—all the furnishings of this human habitation.
    I was particularly absorbed in the electric light upon which
    I fixed my attention: why does <em>it</em> burn and give
    light?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am waiting for your answer, Mr. Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    So he was really expecting me to reply? Very well.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It’s very simple, Magnus...you warned me, I admit.
    To-morrow Toppi will pack my trunks and I shall go back to
    America to resume my...business.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And the Cardinal?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What Cardinal? Ah, yes!... Cardinal X. and my billions. I
    remember. But—don’t gaze at me in such astonishment, Magnus.
    I am sick of it.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What are you sick of, Mr. Wondergood?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_117">117</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “<em>It.</em> Six secretaries. Brainless old women, snuff,
    and my Dante Inferno, where they take me for my walks. Don’t
    look at me so sternly, Magnus. Probably one could have made
    better wine out of my billions, but I managed to produce only
    sour beer. Why did you refuse to help me? Of course, you hate
    human beings, I forgot.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But you <em>love</em> them?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What shall I say, Magnus? No, I am rather indifferent to
    them. Don’t look at me so...pityingly. By God, it isn’t
    worth it! Yes, I am indifferent to them. There are, there
    were and there will be so many of them that it isn’t really
    worth while....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “So I am to conclude that you <em>lied</em>?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Look not at me but at my packed trunks. No, I did not lie,
    not entirely. You know, I wanted to do something interesting
    for the sake of amusement and so I let loose this...this
    emotion....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “So it was only <em>play</em>?...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I blinked again and shrugged my shoulders. I like this method
    of reply to complex questions. And <em>this</em> face of
    Signor Thomas Magnus appealed to me, too; his long, oval face
    recompensed me slightly for my theatrical failures
    and...Maria. I must add that by this time there was a fresh
    cigar in my mouth.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_118">118</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You said that in your past there are some dark pages....
    What’s the trouble, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh! it was a slight exaggeration. Nothing in particular,
    Magnus. I beg your pardon for disturbing you needlessly, but
    at that time I thought I should have spoken thus for the sake
    of style....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Style?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, and the laws of contrast. The present is always
    brighter with a dark past as a background...you understand?
    But I have already told you, Magnus, that my prank had little
    result. In the place I come from they have quite a mistaken
    conception of the pleasures of the game here. I shall have to
    disabuse them when I get back. For a moment I was taken in by
    the old monkey, but its method of fleecing people is rather
    ancient and too certain...like a counting house. I prefer
    an element of risk.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Fleecing people?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Don’t we despise them, Magnus? And if the game has failed,
    let us not at least deny ourselves the pleasure of speaking
    frankly. I am very glad. But I am tired of this prattle and,
    with your permission, I will take another glass of wine.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    There was not even the resemblance of a smile on Thomas
    Magnus’ face. I mention the smile

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_119">119</a></span>

    for the sake of...style. We
    passed the next half hour in silence, broken only by the
    shrieks and yells of Mad Mars and the even pacing of
    Magnus. With his hands behind him and disregarding me
    entirely he paced the room with even step: eight steps
    forward, eight steps backward. Apparently he must have
    been in jail at one time and for quite a while: for he had
    the knack of the experienced prisoner of creating
    distances out of a few meters. I permitted myself to yawn
    slightly and thus drew the attention of my host back to
    myself. But Magnus kept quiet for another moment, until
    the <em>following words</em> rang out through the air and
    well nigh hurled me out of my seat:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But <em>Maria</em> loves you. Of course, you do not know
    that?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I arose.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, that is the truth: Maria loves you. I did not expect
    this misfortune. I failed to kill you, Mr. Wondergood. I
    should have done that at the very beginning and now I do not
    know what to do with you. What do you think about it?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I stretched and...</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="v-indent">
    ...Maria loves <em>Me</em>!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I once witnessed in Philadelphia an unsuccessful
    electrocution of a prisoner. I saw at “La Scala” in Milan my
    colleague Mephisto <em>cringing</em>
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_120">120</a></span>

    and hopping
    all over the stage when the supers moved upon him with
    their crosses—and my silent reply to Magnus was an
    artistic improvisation of both the first and the second
    trick: ah, at that moment I could think of nothing better
    to imitate! I swear by eternal salvation that never before
    had I been permeated by so many deadly currents, never did
    I drink such bitter wine, never was my soul seized with
    such uncontrollable <em>laughter</em>!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Now I no longer laugh or cringe, like a cheap actor. I am
    alone and only my own seriousness can hear and see Me. But in
    that moment of triumph I needed all my strength to control my
    laughter so that I might not deal ringing blows to the face
    of this stern and honest man hurling the Madonna into the
    embraces of...the Devil. Do you really think so? No? Or are
    you merely thinking of Wondergood, the American, with his
    goatee and wet cigar between his gold teeth! Hatred and
    contempt, love and anguish, wrath and laughter,—these filled
    to the brim the cup presented to Me...no, still worse,
    still more bitter, still more deadly! What do I care about
    the deceived Magnus or the stupidity of his eyes and brain?
    But how could the pure eyes of <em>Maria</em> have been
    deceived?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Or am I really such a clever Don Juan that I

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_121">121</a></span>

    can turn the head of an
    innocent and trusting girl by a few simple, silent
    meetings? Madonna, where art Thou? Or, has she discovered
    a resemblance between myself and one of her saints, like
    Toppi’s. But I do not carry with me a traveling prayer
    book! Madonna, where art Thou? Are thy lips stretching out
    to mine? Madonna, where art Thou? Or?...</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And yet I cringed like an actor. I sought to stifle in
    respectful mumbling my hatred and my contempt when this new
    “<em>or</em> ” suddenly filled me with new confusion and such
    love...ah, such love!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “<em>Or</em>, ” thought I, “has <em>Thy</em> immortality,
    Madonna, echoed the immortality of Satan and is it now
    stretching forth this gentle hand to it from the realms of
    Eternity? Thou, who art <em>divine</em>, hast thou
    recognized a friend in him who has become <em>human</em>?
    Thou, who art <em>above</em>, dost thou pity him who is
    <em>below</em>? Oh, Madonna, lay thy hand upon my dark head
    that I may recognize thee by thy touch!...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But hear what further transpired that night.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I know not why Maria has fallen in love with you. That is a
    secret of her soul, too much for my understanding. No, I do
    not know, but I bow to her will as to her frankness. What are
    my

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_122">122</a></span>

    human eyes before her
    all-penetrating gaze, Mr. Wondergood!...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    (The latter, too, was saying the same thing.)</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “A moment ago, in a fit of excitement,” continued Magnus, “I
    said something about murder and death.... No, Mr. Wondergood,
    you may rest secure forever: the chosen one of Maria enjoys
    complete immunity as far as I am concerned. He is protected
    by more than the law—her pure love is his armor. Of course, I
    shall have to ask you to leave us at once. And I believe in
    your honest intention, Wondergood, to place the ocean between
    us....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus moved forward towards me and shouted angrily:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Not another word!... I cannot kill you but if you dare to
    mention the word ‘marriage,’ I!...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He slowly dropped his uplifted hand, and continued calmly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I see that I will have to beg your pardon again for my fit
    of passion, but it is better than <em>falsehood</em>,
    examples of which we have had from you. Do not defend
    yourself, Wondergood. It is quite unnecessary. And of
    marriage let <em>me</em> speak: it will ring less insulting
    to Maria than it would from your lips. It is quite
    unthinkable. Remember

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_123">123</a></span>

    that. I am a sober
    realist: I see nothing but mere coincidence in <em>that
    fatal</em> resemblance of Maria and I am not at all taken
    aback by the thought that my daughter, with all her
    unusual qualities, may some day become a wife and
    mother.... My categorical opposition to this marriage was
    simply another means of warning you. Yes, I am accustomed
    to look soberly upon things, Mr. Wondergood. It is not you
    who is destined to be Maria’s life partner! You do not
    know me at all and now I am compelled to raise slightly
    the curtain behind which I am hiding these many years: my
    idleness is merely rest. I am not at all a peaceful
    villager or a book philosopher. I am a man of struggle. I
    am a warrior on the battlefield of life! And my Maria will
    be the gift only of a hero, if—if I should ever find a
    hero.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You may rest assured, Signor Magnus, that I will not permit
    myself to utter a single word in regard to Signorina Maria.
    You know that I am not a hero. But I should think it
    permissible to ask of you: how am I to reconcile your present
    remarks with your former <em>contempt</em> for man? I
    recollect that you spoke seriously of gallows and prisons.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus laughed loudly:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_124">124</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And do you remember what you said about your <em>love</em>
    for man? Ah, my dear Wondergood: I would be a bad warrior and
    politician if my education did not embrace the art of lying a
    little. We were both playing, that’s all!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You played better,” I admitted quite gloomily.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And you played very badly, my friend,—do not be offended.
    But what am I to do when there suddenly appears before me a
    gentleman all loaded with gold like....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Like an ass. Continue.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And begins to reveal to me his love for humanity, while his
    confidence in his success is equal only to the quantity of
    the dollars in his pocket? The main fault of your play, Mr.
    Wondergood, is that you are too eager for success and seek
    immediate results. This makes the spectator cold and less
    credulous. To be sure, I really did not think you were merely
    acting—the worst play is better than sincere assininity—and I
    must again crave your pardon: you seemed to me just one of
    those foolish Yankees who really take their own bombastic and
    contemptible tirades seriously and...you understand?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Quite fully. I beg you to continue.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Only one phrase of yours,—something about war and revolution
    purchasable with your billions—seemed to me to possess a
    modicum of interest,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_125">125</a></span>

    but the rest of the drivel
    proved that that, too, was a mere slip of the tongue, an
    accidental excerpt of some one else’s text. Your newspaper
    triumphs, your flippancy in serious matters—remember
    Cardinal X!—your cheap philanthropy are of a quite
    different tone.... No, Mr. Wondergood, you are not fit for
    serious drama! And your prattling to-day, despite its
    cynicism, made a better impression than your flamboyant
    circus pathos. I say frankly: were it not for
    <em>Maria</em> I would gladly have had a good laugh at
    your expense, and, without the slightest compunction would
    have raised the farewell cup!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Just one correction, Magnus: I earnestly desired that you
    should take part....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “In what? In your play? Yes, your play lacked the
    <em>creative factor</em> and you earnestly desired to saddle
    me with your poverty of spirit. Just as you hire your artists
    to paint and decorate your palaces so you wanted to hire my
    will and my imagination, my power and my love!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But your hatred for man....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Up to this point Magnus had maintained his tone of irony and
    subtle ridicule: my remark, however, seemed to change him
    entirely. He grew pale, his white hands moved convulsively
    over his body as if they were searching for a weapon, and his
    face became threatening and even horrible.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_126">126</a></span>

    As if fearing the power of
    his own voice, he lowered it almost to a whisper; as if
    fearing that his words would break their leash and run off
    at a wild pace, he tried desperately to hold them in check
    and in order.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Hatred? Be silent, sir. Or have you no conscience at all or
    any common sense? My contempt! My hatred! They were my reply,
    not to your theatrical <em>love</em>, but to your sincere
    and dead indifference. You were insulting <em>me</em> as a
    human being by your indifference: You were insulting life by
    your indifference. It was in your voice, it gleamed savagely
    out of your eyes, and more than once was I seized by
    terror...terror, sir!—when I pierced deeper the mysterious
    emptiness of your pupils. If your past has no dark pages,
    which, as you say, you merely added for the sake of style,
    then there is something worse than that in it: there are
    <em>white</em> pages in it. And I cannot read them!...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, oh!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “When I look at your eternal cigar, and see your
    self-satisfied but handsome and energetic face; when I view
    your unassuming manner, in which the simplicity of the grog
    shop is elevated to the heights of Puritanism, I fully
    understand your naïve game. But I need only meet the pupil of
    your eye...or its <em>white</em> rim and I am immediately

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_127">127</a></span>

    hurled into a void,
    I am seized with alarm and I no longer see either your
    cigar or your gold teeth and I am ready to exclaim: who
    are you that you dare to bear yourself with such
    indifference?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The situation was becoming interesting. <em>Madonna</em>
    loves Me and this creature is about ready to utter my Name at
    any moment! Is he the son of my Father? How could he unravel
    the great mystery of my boundless indifference: I tried so
    carefully to conceal it, even from you!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Here! here!” shouted Magnus, in great excitement, “again
    there are two little tears in your eyes, as I have noticed
    before. They are a <em>lie</em>, Wondergood! There is no
    source of tears behind them. They have fallen from somewhere
    above, from the clouds, like dew. Rather laugh: behind your
    laughter I see merely a bad man, but behind your tears there
    are <em>white</em> pages, white pages!... or has Maria read
    them?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Without taking his eyes off me, as if fearing that I might
    run away, Magnus paced the room, finally seating himself
    opposite Me. His face grew dim and his voice seemed tired,
    when he said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But it seems to me that I am exciting myself in vain....”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_128">128</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do not forget, Magnus, that to-day I myself spoke to you of
    indifference.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He waved his hand wearily and carelessly.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, you did speak. But there is something else involved
    here, Wondergood. There is nothing insulting in the
    indifference, but in the other...I sensed it immediately
    upon your appearance with your billions. I do not know
    whether you will understand what I mean, but I immediately
    felt like shouting of hatred and to demand gallows and blood.
    The gallows is a gloomy thing but the curious jostling about
    the gallows, Mr. Wondergood, are quite unbearable! I do not
    know what they think of our game here in the ‘place’ you come
    from, but we pay for it with our lives, and when there
    suddenly appears before us some curious gentleman in a top
    hat, cigar in mouth, one feels, you understand, like seizing
    him by the back of his neck and...he never stays to the end
    of the performance, anyway. Have you, too, Mr. Wondergood,
    dropped in on us for a brief visit?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    With what a long sigh I uttered the name of <em>Maria</em>!...
    And I no longer played, I no longer lied, when I replied
    to this gloomy man:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, I have dropped in on you for a brief visit, Signor
    Magnus. You have guessed right. For certain very valid
    reasons I can reveal nothing to

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_129">129</a></span>

    you of the <em>white</em>
    pages of my life, the existence of which behind my leather
    binding you have likewise guessed. But on one of them was
    written: <em>death-departure</em>. That was not a top hat
    in the hands of the curious visitor, but a revolver...you
    understand: I look on as long as it is interesting and
    after that I make my bow and depart. Let me put it clearer
    and simpler, out of deference to your realism: in a few
    days, perhaps to-morrow, I depart for the other world....
    No, that is not clear enough: in a few days or to-morrow I
    shall shoot myself, kill myself with a revolver. I at
    first planned to aim at my heart but have decided that the
    brain would be more reliable. I have planned all this long
    ago, at the very beginning...of my appearance before
    you, and was it not in this <em>readiness</em> of mine to
    depart that you have detected ‘inhuman’ indifference?
    Isn’t it true that when one eye is directed upon the
    <em>other</em> world, it is hardly possible to maintain
    any particularly bright flame in the eye directed upon
    <em>this</em> world?... I refer to the kind of flame I see
    in your eyes. O! you have wonderful eyes, Signor Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus remained silent for a few moments and then said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And Maria?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Permit me to reply. I prize Signorina Maria

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_130">130</a></span>

    too highly not to regard her
    <em>love</em> for me as a fatal mistake.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But you wanted that love?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It is very difficult for me to answer that question. At
    first, perhaps—when I indulged in dreams for a while—but the
    more I perceived this fatal resemblance....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “That is mere resemblance,” Magnus hastened to assure me:
    “But you mustn’t be a child, Wondergood! Maria’s soul is
    lofty and beautiful, but she is human, made of flesh and
    bone. She probably has her own little sins, too....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And how about my top hat, Magnus? How about my <em>free</em>
    departure? I need only buy a seat to gaze upon Maria and her
    fatal resemblance—admitting that it is only resemblance!—but
    how must I pay for <em>love</em>?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus said sternly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Only with your life.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You see: only with my life! How, then, did you expect me to
    desire such love?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But you have miscalculated: she already loves you.“</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, if the Signorina Maria really loves me then my
    <em>death</em> can be no obstacle: however, I do not make
    myself clear. I wanted to say that my departure...no, I had
    better say nothing. In

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_131">131</a></span>

    short, Signor Magnus: would
    you agree to have me place my billions at your disposal
    <em>now</em>?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He looked at me quickly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Now?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, now, when we are no longer playing: I at love and you
    at hatred. Now, when I am about to disappear entirely, taking
    with me the ‘sediment’ of a gentlemen? Let me make it quite
    clear: would you like to be my heir?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus frowned and looked at me in anger: apparently he took
    my words for ridicule. But I was calm and serious. It seemed
    to me that his large, white hands were trembling slightly. He
    turned away for a moment and then, whirling about quickly, he
    shouted loudly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No! Again you want.... No!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He stamped his foot and cried once more: “No!” His hands were
    trembling. His breathing was heavy and irregular. There
    followed a long silence, the wailing of the tempest, the
    whistling and murmur of the wind. And again, great calm,
    great, dead, all embracing peace descended upon me.
    Everything was turned <em>within</em> Me. I still could hear
    the earthly demons of the storm, but <em>their</em> voices
    sounded far away and dull. I saw before me a <em>man</em> and
    he was strange and cold to me, like a stone statue. One after
    another there floated by me all the days of my human
    existence.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_132">132</a></span>

    There was the gleam of
    faces, the weak sound of voices and curious laughter. And
    then, again all was silent. I turned my gaze to the other
    side—and there I was met by dumbness. It was as if I were
    immured between two dumb, stone walls: behind one was
    <em>their</em> human life, which I had abandoned, and
    behind the other, in silence and in darkness, stretched
    forth the world of eternal and real being. Its silence was
    resounding, its darkness was gleaming, eternal, joyous
    life beat constantly like breakers, upon the hard rocks of
    the impenetrable wall. But deaf was my consciousness and
    silent my thought. From beneath the weak legs of Thought
    there came <em>Memory</em> —and it hung suspended in the
    void, immovable, paralyzed for the moment. <em>What</em>
    did I leave behind the wall of my Unconsciousness?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Thought made no reply. It was motionless, empty and silent.
    Two silences surrounded Me, two darknesses enveloped me. Two
    walls were burying me, and behind one, in the pale movement
    of shadows, passed their human life, while behind the
    other,—in silence and in darkness stretched forth the world
    of my real, eternal being. Whence shall I hear The Call?
    Whither can I take a step?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And at that moment I suddenly heard the voice of a man,
    strange and distant. It grew closer and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_133">133</a></span>

    closer, there was a gentle
    ring in it. It was Magnus speaking. With great effort and
    concentration, I tried to catch the words and this was
    what I heard:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And wouldn’t you rather continue living, Wondergood?”</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      March 18.<br/>
      Rome, Palazzo Orsini.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    It is three days now that Magnus and Maria are living in my
    palazzo in Rome. It is empty and silent and really seems
    huge. Last night, worn by insomnia, I wandered about its
    halls and stairways, over rooms I had never seen before and
    their number astonished me. Maria’s <em>soul</em> has
    expelled from it all that was frivolous and impure and only
    the saintly Toppi moves through its emptiness, like the
    pendulum of a church clock. Ah, how saintly he looks. If not
    for his broad back, the broad folds of his coat, and the odor
    of fur in his head, I myself would take him for one of the
    saints who have honored me with their acquaintance.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I rarely see my guests. I am turning my entire estate into
    cash and Magnus and Toppi and all the secretaries are busy
    with this work from morning to night; our telegraph is
    constantly buzzing. Magnus has little to say to me. He
    only

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_134">134</a></span>

    talks business. Maria...it
    seems as if I were avoiding her. I can see her through my
    window walking in the garden, and this is quite enough for
    me, for her <em>soul</em> is here and every atom of the
    air is filled with her breath. And, as I have already
    remarked, I suffer with insomnia.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    As you see, my friend, I have remained among the
    <em>living</em>, a dead hand could not possibly write even
    the dead words I am not setting down. Let us forget the past,
    as sweethearts would who have just settled their differences.
    Let us be friends, you and I. Give me your hand, my friend! I
    vow by eternal salvation that never again will I chase you
    hence or laugh at you: if I have lost the wisdom of the snake
    I have acquired the gentleness of the dove. I am rather sorry
    that I have driven away my painters and my interviewers: I
    have no one to inquire whom I <em>resemble</em> with my
    radiant countenance? I personally feel that I remind one of a
    powdered darkey, who is afraid to rub the powder off with his
    sleeve and thus reveal his black skin...ah, I still have a
    black skin!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yes, I have remained <em>alive</em> but I know not yet how
    far I shall succeed in keeping up this state: have you any
    idea how hard are the transitions from a nomad to a settled
    life? I was a redskin, a carefree nomad, who folds up and
    casts off all that is human, as he would a tent. Now I am
    laying

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_135">135</a></span>

    a granite foundation for
    an earthly home and I, having little faith, am cold and
    trembling. Will it be warm when the white snow covers my
    new home? What do you think, my friend, is the best
    heating system?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I promised Thomas Magnus that night that I would not kill
    myself. We sealed this agreement with a warm handshake. We
    did not open our veins nor seal the pact with our blood. We
    simply said “yes” and that was quite sufficient: as you know
    only human beings break agreements. Devils always keep
    them.... You need only recall your horny, hairy heroes and
    their Spartan honesty. Fortunately (let us call it
    ‘fortunate’) we had set no...date. I swear by eternal
    salvation, I would be a poor king and ruler if, when building
    a palace, I did not leave for myself a secret exit, a little
    door, a modest loophole through which wise kings disappear
    when their foolish subjects rise and break into Versailles.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I will not kill myself to-morrow. Perhaps I shall wait quite
    a while. I will not kill myself: of the two walls I have
    chosen the lower one and I am quite human now, even as you my
    friend. My earthly experiment is not very thrilling as yet,
    but who knows?—this human life may unexpectedly grow quite
    attractive! Has not Toppi lived to grow gray and to a
    peaceful end? Why

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_136">136</a></span>

    should not I, traversing all
    the ages of man, like the seasons of the year, grow to be
    a gray old sage, a wise guide and teacher, the bearer of
    the covenant and arterio sclerosis? Ah, this ridiculous
    sclerosis, these ills of old age—it is only now that they
    begin to seem terrible to Me, but, can I not get used to
    them and even grow to love them? Every one says it is easy
    to get used to life. Well, I, too, will try to get used to
    it. Everything here is so well ordered that after rain
    comes sunshine and dries him who is wet, if he has not
    been in too great a hurry to die. Everything here is so
    well ordered that there is not a single disease for which
    there is no cure. This is so good! One may be ill all the
    time, provided there is a drug store nearby!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    At any rate, I have my little door, my secret exit, my
    narrow, wet, dark corridor, beyond which are the stars and
    all the breadth of my illimitable space! My friend, I want to
    be frank with you: there is a certain characteristic of
    insubordination in me, and it is that I fear. What is a cough
    or a catarrh of the stomach? But it is possible that I may
    suddenly refuse to cough, for no reason at all, or for some
    trivial cause, and run off! I like you at this moment. I am
    quite ready to conclude a long and fast alliance with you,
    but <em>something</em> may suddenly gleam across your
    dear

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_137">137</a></span>

    face which...no, it is
    quite impossible to do without a little secret door for
    him who is so capricious and insubordinate! Unfortunately,
    I am proud, too,—an old and well known vice of Satan! Like
    a fish struck in the head, I am dazed by my human
    existence. A fatal unconsciousness is driving me into your
    life, but of one thing I am quite certain: I am of the
    race of the <em>free</em>. I am of the tribe of the
    <em>rulers</em>. I come from those who transform their
    will into laws. Conquered kings are taken into captivity
    but conquered kings never become slaves. And when I shall
    perceive, above my head, the whip of a dirty guard and my
    fettered hands are helpless to avert the blow...well:
    shall I remain living with welts upon my back? Shall I
    bargain with my judges about another blow of the whip?
    Shall I kiss the hand of the executioner? Or shall I send
    to the druggist for an eye lotion?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    No, let not Magnus misjudge me for a little slip in our
    agreement: I will live only as long as I want to live. All
    the blessings of the human existence, which he offered me on
    that night, when Satan was tempted by man, will not strike
    the weapon from my hand: in it alone is the assurance of my
    liberty! Oh, man, what are all your kingdoms and dukedoms,
    your knowledge and your nobility, your gold and your freedom
    beside

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_138">138</a></span>

    this little, free
    movement of the finger which, in a moment carries you up
    to the Throne of Thrones!...</p>
<p class="v-indent">
<em>Maria!</em></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yes, I am afraid of her. The look in her eye is so clear and
    commanding, the light of her love is so mighty, enchanting
    and beautiful that I am all atremble and everything in me is
    quivering and urging me to immediate flight. With hitherto
    unknown happiness, with veiled promises, with singing dreams
    she tempts Me! Shall I cry: Away!—or shall I bend mine to her
    will and follow her?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Where? I do not know. Or are there other worlds beside those
    I know or have forgotten? Whence comes this motionless light
    behind my back? It is growing ever broader and brighter. Its
    warm touch heats my soul, so that its Polar ice crumbles and
    melts. But I am afraid to look back. I may see Sodom on fire
    and if I look I may turn into stone. Or is it a new Sun,
    which I have not yet seen upon this earth that is rising
    behind my back, and I, like a fool, am fleeing from it and
    baring my back instead of my breast to it, the low, dumb neck
    of a frightened animal, instead of my lofty brow?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Maria! Will you give me my revolver? I paid ten dollars for
    it, together with the holster. To

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_139">139</a></span>

    you I will not give it for a
    kingdom! Only do not look at Me, oh, Queen...otherwise,
    otherwise I will give you everything: the revolver and the
    holster and Satan himself!</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      March 26.<br/>
      Rome, Palazzo Orsini.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    It is the fifth night that I do not sleep. When the last
    light is turned out in my silent palazzo, I quietly descend
    the stairs, quietly order a machine—somehow or other even the
    noise of my own steps and voice disturb me, and I go for the
    night into the Campagna. There, leaving the automobile on the
    road, I wander about until day-break or sit immovable upon
    some dark ruins. I cannot be seen at all and the rare
    passersby, perhaps some peasants from Albano, converse quite
    loudly and without restraint. I like to remain unseen. It
    reminds me of something I have forgotten.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Once, as I sat down on a stone, I disturbed a lizzard. It may
    have been that it lightly moved the grass beneath my feet and
    disappeared. Perhaps it was a snake? I do not know. But I
    wanted desperately to become a lizzard or a snake, concealed
    beneath a stone: I am troubled by my large stature, by the
    size of my feet and arms: They make it very difficult to
    become invisible. I

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_140">140</a></span>

    likewise refrain from looking
    at my face in the mirror: it is painful to think I have a
    face, which all can see. Why did I fear darkness so much
    at the beginning? It is so easy to conceal oneself in it.
    Apparently all animals experience such subtle shame, fear
    and worriment and seek seclusion when they are changing
    their skin or hide.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    So, I am changing my skin? Ah, it is the same, worthless
    prattle! The whole trouble is that I have failed to escape
    <em>Maria’s</em> gaze and am, apparently preparing to close
    the last door, the door I guarded so well. But I am ashamed!
    I swear by eternal salvation, I feel ashamed, like a girl
    before the altar. I am almost blushing. Blushing Satan...no,
    quiet, quiet: <em>he</em> is not here! Quiet!...</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus told her everything. She did not reiterate that she
    loves Me but looked at me and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Promise <em>me</em>, you will not kill yourself.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The <em>rest</em> was in her gaze. You remember how bright it
    is? But do not think that I hastily agreed. Like a salamander
    in the fire, I quickly changed colors. I shall not repeat to
    you all the flaming phrases I uttered: I have forgotten them.
    But you remember how bright and serene Maria’s gaze is? I
    kissed her hand and said humbly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Madam! I do not ask you for forty days and a desert for
    contemplation: the desert I will find

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_141">141</a></span>

    myself and a week is quite
    enough for me to think the matter over. But do give me a
    week and...please, don’t look at me any
    more...otherwise....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    No, that wasn’t what I said. I said it in other words, but
    it’s all the same. I am now changing my skin. It hurts me. I
    am frightened and ashamed because any crow might see me and
    come to pick my flesh. What use is there in the fact that
    there is a revolver in my pocket? It is only when you learn
    to hit yourself that you can hit a crow: crows know that and
    consequently do not fear tragically bulging pockets.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Having become human and descended from above I have become
    but half a man. I entered upon this human existence as if
    into a strange element, but I have not lost myself in it
    entirely: I still cling with one hand to my Heaven and my
    eyes are still above the surface. But she commands me to
    accept man in his entirety: only he is a <em>man</em> who has
    said: never shall I kill myself, never shall I leave life of
    my own free will. And what about the whip? These cursed cuts
    upon my back? Pride?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Oh, Maria, Maria, how terribly you tempt Me!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I look into the past of this earth and serious myriads of
    tragic shadows floating slowly over climes and ages! Their
    hands stretch hopelessly

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_142">142</a></span>

    into space, their bony ribs
    tear through the lean, thin skin, their eyes are filled
    with tears, and their sighs have dried up their throats. I
    see blood and madness, violence and falsehood, I hear
    their oaths, which they constantly betray, their prayers
    to God, in which, with every word of mercy and
    forgiveness, they curse their own earth. Wherever I look,
    I see the earth smoking in convulsion; no matter in which
    direction I strain my ear, I hear everywhere unceasing
    moans: or is the womb of the earth itself filled with
    moaning? I see a myriad cups about me, but no matter which
    of them my lips may touch, I find it filled with rust and
    vinegar: or has man no other drink? And this is
    <em>man</em>?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I knew <em>them</em> before. I have seen <em>them</em>
    before. But I looked upon them as Augustus did from his box
    upon the galaxy of his victims: Ave, Cæsar! These who are
    about to die salute you. And I looked upon them with the eyes
    of an eagle and my wise, belaureled head did not disdain to
    take notice of their groaning cries even with so much as a
    nod: they came and disappeared, they marched on in endless
    procession—and endless was the indifference of my Cæsar-like
    gaze. And now...is it really I who walks on so hastily,
    playing with the sand of the arena? And am I this dirty,
    emaciated, hungry slave who lifts his

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_143">143</a></span>

    convict face into the air,
    yelling hoarsely into the indifferent eyes of Fate:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Ave, Cæsar! Ave, Cæsar!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I feel a sharp whip upon my back and with a cry of pain I
    fall to the ground. Is it some <em>Master</em> who is beating
    me? No, it is another <em>slave</em>, who has been ordered
    to whip a <em>slave</em> : very soon his knout will be in my
    hand and his back will be covered with blood and he will be
    chewing the sand, the sand which now grates between my teeth.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Oh, Maria, Maria, how terribly you tempt Me!

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_144">144</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      March 29<br/>
      Rome.</p></div>
<p class="v1">
<span class="dropcap">B</span>uy the blackest paint available,
    take the largest brush you
    can find and, with a broad line, divide my life into
    Yesterday and To-day. Take the staff of Moses and divide the
    stream of Time and dry it up clear down to its bed—then only
    will you sense my <em>To-day</em>.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
<i lang="la" xml:lang="la">Ave, Cæsar, moriturus te
    salutat!</i></p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      April 2, Rome.<br/>
      Pallazzo Orsini.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    I do not want to lie. There is not yet in me, oh man, any
    love for you, and if you have hastened to open your arms to
    me, please close them: the time has not yet come for
    passionate embraces. Later, at some other date, we shall
    embrace, but meanwhile, let us be cold and restrained, like
    two gentlemen in misfortune. I cannot say that my respect for
    you has grown to any extent, although your life and your fate
    have become

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_145">145</a></span>

    my life and my fate: let
    the facts suffice that I have voluntarily placed my neck
    beneath the yoke and that one and the same whip are
    furrowing our backs.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yes, that is quite sufficient for the present. You have
    observed that I no longer use a super-capital in writing the
    word “I”?—I have thrown it out together with the revolver.
    This is a sign of submission and equality. You understand?
    Like a king, I have taken the oath of allegiance to your
    constitution. But I shall not, like a king, betray this vow:
    I have preserved from my former life a respect for contracts.
    I swear I will be true to your comrades-at-hard-labor and
    will not make any attempt to escape alone!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    For the last few nights, before I took this decision, I
    thought much upon <em>our</em> life. It is wretched. Don’t
    you think so? It is difficult and humiliating to be this
    little thing called man, the cunning and avaricious little
    worm that crawls, hastily multiplies itself and lies, turning
    away its head from the final blow—the worm that no matter how
    much it lies, will perish just the same at the appointed
    hour. But I will be a worm. Let me, too, beget children, let
    the unthinking foot also crush my unthinking head at the
    appointed hour—I meekly accept all consequences. We are both
    of us humiliated, comrade, and in this alone

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_146">146</a></span>

    there is some consolation:
    you will listen to my complaints and I—to yours. And if
    the matter should ultimately reach the state of
    litigation, why the witnesses will all be ready! That is
    well: When one kills in the public square there are always
    eyewitnesses.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I will lie, if necessary. I will not lie in that free play of
    lying with which even prophets lie, but in that enforced
    manner of lying employed by the rabbit, which compels him to
    hide his ears, to be gray in summer and white in winter. What
    can one do when behind every tree a hunter with a rifle is
    concealed! This lying may appear to be ignoble from one point
    of view and may well call forth condemnation upon us, but you
    and I must live, my friend. Let <em>bystanders</em> accuse us
    to their heart’s content, but, when necessary, we will lie
    like wolves, too! we will spring forward, suddenly, and seize
    the enemy by the throat: one must live, brother, one must
    live, and are we to be held responsible for the fact that
    there is such great lure and such fine taste in blood! In
    reality neither you nor I are proud of our lying, of our
    cowardice or of our cruelty, and our bloodthirstiness is
    certainly not a matter of conviction.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But however hideous our life may be, it is still more
    miserable. Do you agree with that? I do not love you yet, oh
    man, but on these nights I

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_147">147</a></span>

    have been more than once on
    the verge of tears when I thought of your suffering, of
    your tortured body, and of your soul, relinquished to
    eternal crucifixion. It is well for a wolf to be a wolf.
    It is well for a rabbit to be a rabbit. But you, man,
    contain both God and Satan—and, oh, how terrible is the
    imprisonment of both in that narrow and dark cell of
    yours! Can God be a wolf, tearing throats and drinking
    blood! Can Satan be a rabbit, hiding his ears behind his
    humped back! No, that is intolerable. I agree with you.
    That fills life with eternal confusion and pain and the
    sorrow of the soul becomes boundless.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Think of it: of three children that you beget, one becomes a
    murderer, the other the victim and the third, the judge and
    executioner. And each day the murderers are murdered and
    still they continue to be born; and each day the murderers
    kill conscience and conscience kills the murderers. And all
    are alive: the murderers and conscience. Oh, what a fog we
    live in! Give heed to all the <em>words</em> spoken by man
    from the day of his birth and you will think: this is God!
    Look at all the <em>deeds</em> of man from his very first day
    and you will exclaim in disgust: this is a beast! Thus does
    man struggle with himself for thousands of years and the
    sorrow of his soul is boundless and the suffering of his mind
    is terrible and horrible,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_148">148</a></span>

    while the <em>final</em>
    judge is slow about his coming.... But he will never come.
    I say this to you: we are forever alone with our life.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But I accept this, too. Not yet has the earth endowed me with
    my name and I know not who I am: Cain or Abel? But I accept
    the sacrifice as I do murder. I am everywhere with you and
    everywhere I follow you, Man. Let us weep together in the
    desert, knowing that no one will give heed to us...or
    perhaps some one will? You see: you and I are beginning to
    have faith in some one’s Ear and soon I will begin to believe
    in a triangular Eye...it is really impossible that such a
    concert should have no hearer, that such a spectacle should
    be wasted on the desert air!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I think of the fact that no one has yet beaten me, and I am
    afraid. What will become of my soul when some one’s grubby
    hand strikes me on the face.... What will become of me! For I
    know that no earthly revenge could return my face to me. And
    what will then become of my soul?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I swear I will become reconciled even to this. Everywhere
    with you and after you, man. What is my face when you struck
    the face of your own Christ and spat into his eyes?
    Everywhere with you! And if necessary, I myself will strike
    at Christ with the hand with which I now write: I

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_149">149</a></span>

    go with you to all ends, man.
    They beat us and they will continue to beat us. We beat
    Christ and will still beat him.... Ah, bitter is our life,
    almost unbearable!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Only a while ago, I rejected your embraces. I said they were
    premature. But now I say: let us embrace more firmly,
    brother, let us cling closely to each other—it is so painful,
    so terrible to be alone in this life when all exits from it
    are closed. And I know not yet wherein there is more pride
    and liberty: in going away voluntarily, whenever one wishes,
    or in accepting, without resistance, the hand of the
    executioner? In calmly placing one’s hands upon his breast,
    putting one foot forward and, with head proudly bent
    backward, to wait calmly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do thy duty, executioner!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Or:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Soldiers, here’s my breast: fire!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    There is something plastic in this pose and it pleases me.
    But still more am I pleased with the fact that once again my
    greater Ego is rising within me at the striking of this pose.
    Of course, the executioner will not fail to do his duty and
    the soldiers will not lower their rifles, but the important
    thing is the line, the <em>moment</em>, when before my very
    death itself I shall suddenly find myself immortal and
    broader than life itself. It is

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_150">150</a></span>

    strange, but with one turn of
    the head, with one phrase, expressed or conceived at the
    proper moment, I could, so to speak, halt the function of
    my very spirit and the entire operation would be performed
    outside of me. And when death shall have finally performed
    its rôle of redeemer, its darkness would not eclipse the
    light, for the latter will have first separated itself
    from me and scattered into space, in order to reassemble
    somewhere and blaze forth again...but where?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Strange, strange.... I sought to escape from men—and found
    myself at that wall of Unconsciousness known only to Satan!
    How important, indeed, is the pose! I must make note of that.
    But will the pose be as convincing and will it not lose in
    plasticity if instead of death, the executioner and the
    firing squad I should be compelled to say something
    else...well, something like:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Here’s my face: strike!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I do not know why I am so concerned about my face, but it
    does concern me greatly. I confess, man, that it worries me
    very much indeed. No, a mere trifle. I will simply subdue my
    spirit. Let them beat me! When the spirit is crushed the
    operation is no more painful or humiliating than it would be
    if I were to beat my overcoat on its hanger....</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    ...But I have forgotten that I am not alone

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_151">151</a></span>

    and being in your company
    have fallen into impolite meditation. For a half hour I
    have been silent over this sheet of paper and it seemed
    all the time as if I had been talking and quite excitedly!
    I forgot that it is not enough to think, that one must
    also speak! What a shame it is, man, that for the exchange
    of thoughts we must resort to the service of such a poor
    and stealthy broker as the word—he steals all that is
    precious and defiles the best thoughts with the chatter of
    the market place. In truth, this pains me much more than
    death or the beating.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am terrified by the necessity of <em>silence</em> when I
    come upon the <em>extraordinary</em>, which is
    inexpressible. Like a rivulet I run and advance only as far
    as the ocean: in the depths of the latter is the end of my
    murmuring. Within me, however, motionless and omnipresent,
    rocking to and fro, is the ocean. It only hurls noise and
    surf upon the earth, but its depths are dumb and motionless
    and quite without any purpose are the ships sailing on its
    surface. How shall I describe it?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Before I resolved to enroll myself as an earthly slave I did
    not speak to Maria or to Magnus.... Why should I speak to
    Maria when her beckoning is <em>clear</em>, like her gaze?
    But having become a slave I went to Magnus to complain and to
    seek advice—apparently the human begins thus.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_152">152</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus heard me in silence and, as it seemed to me, with some
    inner excitement. He works day and night, virtually knowing
    no rest, and the complicated business of the liquidation of
    my property is moving forward as rapidly in his hands as if
    he had been engaged in such work all his life. I like his
    heroic gestures and his contempt for details: when he cannot
    unravel a situation he hurls millions out of the window with
    the grace of a grandee. But he is weary and his eyes seem
    larger and darker on the background of his dim face. Only now
    have I learned from Maria that he is tortured by frequent
    headaches.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    My complaints against life, I fear, have failed to arouse any
    particular sympathy on his part: No matter what the
    accusations I brought against man and the life he leads,
    Magnus would reply impatiently:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, yes, Wondergood. That is what being a man means. Your
    misfortune is that you discovered this rather late and are
    now quite unnecessarily aroused. When you shall have
    <em>experienced</em> at least a part of that which now
    terrifies you, you will speak in quite a different tone.
    However, I am glad that you have dropped your
    <em>indifference</em>: you have become, much more nervous
    and energetic. But whence comes this immeasurable
    terror

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_153">153</a></span>

    in your eyes? Collect yourself, Wondergood!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I laughed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Thank you. I am quite collected. Apparently it is the
    <em>slave</em>, in expectation of the whip, who peers at you
    from within my eye. Have patience, Magnus. I am not quite
    acclimated to the situation. Tell me, shall I or shall I not
    be compelled to commit...murder?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Quite possibly.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And can you tell me <em>how</em> this happens?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Both of us looked simultaneously at his white hands and
    Magnus replied somewhat ironically:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, I will not tell you that. But if you wish I will tell
    you something else: I will tell you what it means to accept
    man to the <em>very end</em> —it is this that is really
    worrying you, is it not?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And with much coolness and a sort of secret impatience, as if
    another thought were devouring his attention, he told me
    briefly of a certain unwilling and terrible murderer. I do
    not know whether he was telling me a fact or a dark tale
    created for my personal benefit, but this was the story: It
    happened long ago. A certain Russian, a political exile, a
    man of wide education yet deeply religious, as often happens
    in Russia, escaped from <em>katorga</em>, and after long and
    painful wandering over the Siberian forests, he
    found

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_154">154</a></span>

    refuge with some
    non-conformist sectarians. Huge, wooden, fresh huts in a
    thick forest, surrounded by tall fences; great bearded
    people, large ugly dogs—something on that order. And in
    his very presence, soon after his arrival, there was to be
    performed a monstrous crime: these insane mystics, under
    the influence of some wild religious fanaticism, were to
    sacrifice an innocent <em>lamb</em>, i.e., upon a
    home-made altar, to the accompaniment of hymns, they were
    to kill a child. Magnus did not relate all the painful
    details, limiting himself solely to the fact that it was a
    seven year old boy, in a new shirt, and that his young
    mother witnessed the ceremony. All the reasonable
    arguments, all the objections of the exile that they were
    about to perform a great sacrilege, that not the mercy of
    the Lord awaited them but the terrible tortures of hell,
    proved powerless to overcome the fierce and dull
    stubbornness of the fanatics. He fell upon his knees,
    begged, wept and tried to seize the knife—at that moment
    the victim, stripped, was already on the table while the
    <em>mother</em> was trying desperately to control her
    tears and cries—but he only succeeded in rousing the mad
    anger of the fanatics: they threatened to kill him,
    too....</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus looked at me and said slowly with a peculiar calm:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_155">155</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And how would you have acted in that case, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, I would have fought until I was killed?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes! He did better. He offered his services and with his
    <em>own</em> hand, with appropriate song, he cut the boy’s
    throat. You are astonished? But he said: ‘Better for me to
    take this terrible sin and punishment upon myself than to
    surrender into the arms of hell these innocent fools.’ Of
    course, such things happen only with Russians and, it seems
    to me, he himself was somewhat deranged. He died eventually
    in an insane asylum.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Following a period of silence, I asked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And how would you have acted, Magnus?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And with still greater coolness, he replied:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Really, I do not know. It would have depended on the moment.
    It is quite possible I would have left those beasts, but it
    is also possible that I too...human madness is extremely
    contagious, Mr. Wondergood!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do you call it only madness?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I said: human madness. But it is you who are concerned in
    this, Wondergood: <em>how</em> do you like it? I am off to
    work. In the meantime, devote yourself to discerning the
    <em>boundary</em> of the human, which you are now willing to
    accept in its entirety,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_156">156</a></span>

    and then tell me about it.
    You have not changed your intention, I hope, of remaining
    with <em>us</em>?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He laughed and went away, patronizingly polite. And I
    remained to think. And so I think: where is the boundary?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I confess that I have begun to fear Magnus somewhat...or is
    this fear one of the gifts of my complete human existence?
    But when he speaks to me in this fashion I become animated
    with a strange confusion, my eyes move timidly, my will is
    bent, as if too great and strange a load had been put upon
    it. Think, man: I shake his big hand with <em>reverence</em>
    and find <em>joy</em> in his caress! This is not true of me
    before, but now, in every conversation, I perceive that this
    man can go <em>further</em> than I in everything.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I fear I <em>hate</em> him. If I have not yet experienced
    love, I know not hatred either, and it will be strange indeed
    if I should be compelled to begin by hating the
    <em>father</em> of Maria!... In what a fog we do live, man! I
    have just merely mentioned the name of Maria, her clear gaze
    has only touched my soul and already my hatred of Magnus is
    extinguished (or did I only conjure it up?) and extinguished
    also is my fear of man and life (or did I merely invent it?)
    and great joy, great peace has descended upon me.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    It is as if I were again a white schooner on the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_157">157</a></span>

    glassy ocean; as if I held
    all answers in my hand and were merely too lazy to open it
    and read therein, as if <em>immortality</em> had returned
    to me...ah, I can speak no more, oh, man! Let me press
    your hand?</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      April 6, 1914.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    The good Toppi approves <em>all</em> my actions. He amuses me
    greatly, this good Toppi. As I expected, he has
    <em>completely</em> forgotten his true origin: he regards all
    my reminders of our past as jests. Sometimes he laughs but
    more often he frowns as if he were hurt, for he is religious
    and considers it an insult to be compared with a “horny”
    devil, even in jest: he himself is now convinced that devils
    have horns. His Americanism, at first pale and weak, like a
    pencil sketch, has now become filled with color, and I,
    myself, am ready to believe all the nonsense given out by
    Toppi as his life—it is so sincere and convincing. According
    to <em>him</em>, he has been in my service about fifteen
    years and particularly amusing it is to hear his stories of
    his youth.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Apparently he, too, has been touched by the charms of
    <em>Maria</em>: my decision to surrender all my money to her
    father astonished him much less than I expected. He merely
    chewed his cigar for a moment and asked:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_158">158</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And what will he do with your money?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I do not know, Toppi.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He raised his brow and frowned:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are joking, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You see, Toppi: just now we, i.e., Magnus is occupied in
    converting my estate into gold and jamming it into banks, in
    his name, of course. You understand?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “How can I fail to understand, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “These are all preliminary, essential steps. What may happen
    further...I do not know yet.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, you are jesting again?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You must remember, old man, that I myself did not know what
    to do with my money. It is not money that I need but new
    activity. You understand? But Magnus <em>knows</em>. I do
    not know yet what his plans are but it is what Magnus said
    that is important to me: ‘I will compel you to work,
    Wondergood!’ Oh, Magnus is a great man. You will see that for
    yourself, Toppi!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi frowned again and replied:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are master of your money, Mr. Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Ah, you have forgotten everything, Toppi! Don’t you remember
    about that <em>play</em>? That I wanted to play?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_159">159</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, you did say something about it. But I thought you were
    joking.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, I was not joking. I was only mistaken. They do play here
    but this is not a theater. It is a gambling house and so I
    gave all my money to Magnus: let him break the bank. You
    understand? He is the banker, he will manage the game and I
    shall simply do the betting.... Quite a life, eh?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Apparently the old fool understood nothing. He kept raising
    and lowering his eyebrows and again inquired:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And how soon may we expect your betrothal to Signorina
    Maria?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I do not know yet, Toppi. But that is not the thing. I see
    you are dissatisfied. You do not trust Magnus?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, Signor Magnus is a worthy man. But one thing I do fear,
    Mr. Wondergood, if you will permit me to be frank: he is a
    man who does not believe. This seems strange to me: how can
    the father of Signorina Maria be a non-believer? Is that not
    so? Permit me to ask: do you intend to give anything to his
    Eminence?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “That depends now on Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh! On Signor Magnus? So, so. And do you know that His
    Eminence has already been to see Signor Magnus? He was here a
    few days ago

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_160">160</a></span>

    and spent several hours in
    this study. You were not at home at that time.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, I do not know. We have not spoken about that, but have
    no fear: we will find <em>something</em> for the cardinal.
    Confess, old man: you are quite enchanted with that old
    monkey?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi glanced at me sharply and sighed. Then he lapsed into
    thought...and strange as it may seem—something akin to a
    monkey appeared in his countenance, as in the cardinal’s.
    Later, from somewhere deep within him, there appeared a
    smile. It illumined his hanging nose, rose to his eyes and
    blazed forth within them in two bright, little flames, not
    devoid of wanton malice. I looked at him in astonishment and
    even with joy: yes that was my old Toppi, risen from his
    human grave.... I am convinced that his hair again has the
    smell of fur instead of oil! Gently I kissed his brow—old
    habits cannot be rooted out—and exclaimed:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are enchanting, Toppi! But <em>what</em> was it that
    gave you such joy?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I waited to see whether he would show Maria to the
    cardinal?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “He did not!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But Toppi remained silent. And as it had

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_161">161</a></span>

    come so did the smile
    disappear, slowly: at first the hanging nose grew pale and
    became quite indistinct, then all at once the flames
    within his eyes went out—and again the old dejection,
    sourness and odor of church hypocrisy buried him who had
    been resurrected for a moment. It would have been useless
    to trouble the ashes with further questions.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    This happened yesterday. A warm rain fell during the day but
    it cleared up towards evening and Magnus, weary and
    apparently suffering with headache, suggested that we take a
    ride into the Campagna. We left our chauffeur behind, a
    practice peculiar to all our intimate trips. His duties were
    performed by Magnus, with extraordinary skill and daring. On
    this occasion, his usual daring reached the point of
    audacity: despite the ever-thickening twilight and the muddy
    road, Magnus drove the automobile at such mad speed that more
    than once did I look up at his broad, motionless back. But
    that was only at first: the presence of Maria, whom I
    supported with my arm (I do not dare say embraced!) soon
    brought me to the loss of all my senses. I cannot describe it
    all to you—so that you would really feel it—the aromatic air
    of the Campagna, which caressed my face, the magnificence and
    charm of our arrow-like speed, my virtual loss of all
    sensation of material

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_162">162</a></span>

    weight, of the complete
    disappearance of <em>body</em>, when I felt myself a
    speeding thought, a flying gaze....</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But still less can I tell you of <em>Maria</em>. Her Madonna
    gaze whitened in the twilight, like marble; like the
    mysterious silence and perfect beauty of marble was her
    gentle, sweet and wise silence. I barely touched her slender,
    supple figure, but if I had been embracing within the hollow
    of my hand the entire firmness of earth and sky I could not
    have felt a more complete mastery of the <em>whole world</em>!
    Do you know what a line is in measurement? Not much,—is
    that not so? And it was only by the measure of a line that
    Maria bent her divine form to me—no, no more than that! But
    what would you say, man, if the <em>sun</em>, coming down
    from its course just one line were to come closer to you by
    that distance? Would you not consider it a <em>miracle</em>?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    My existence seemed unbounded, like the universe, which knows
    neither your time nor distance. For a moment there gleamed
    before me the wall of my unconsciousness, that unconquerable
    barrier against which the spirit of him who has donned the
    human form beats in vain,—and as quickly did it disappear: it
    was swallowed, without sound or conflict, by the waves of my
    new sea. Even higher they rose, enshrouding the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_163">163</a></span>

    world. There was no longer
    anything to remember for me or to know: my new human soul
    remembered all and commanded all. I am a man!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    What gave me the idea that I hate Magnus? I looked at this
    motionless, erect and firm human back and thought that behind
    it a heart was beating. I thought of how painful and terrible
    it was for it to remain firm and erect and of how much pain
    and suffering had already fallen to the lot of this human
    creature, no matter how proud it might appear or dejected.
    And suddenly I realized to the extent of pain and tears, how
    much I loved Magnus, this very same Magnus! He speeds so
    wildly and has no fear! And the very moment I sensed this,
    Maria’s eyes turned upon me.... Ah, they are as bright at
    night as they are by day! But at that moment there was a
    troubled look within them. They were asking: Why these tears?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    What could I say in reply with the aid of weak words! I
    silently took Maria’s hand and pressed it to my lips. And
    without taking her gaze off me, shining in cold, marble
    luster, she quietly withdrew her hand—and I became
    confused—and again gave it to me, taking off her glove. Will
    you permit me to discontinue, man? I do not know who you are,
    you who are reading these lines, and I rather fear
    you...your swift and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_164">164</a></span>

    daring imagination. Moreover,
    a gentleman feels ill at ease in speaking of his success
    with the ladies. Besides, it was time to return: on the
    hills the lights of Tivoli were already gleaming and
    Magnus reduced his speed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We were moving quite slowly on the return trip and Magnus,
    grown merry, wiping his brow with his handkerchief, now and
    then addressed brief remarks to us. There is one thing I will
    not conceal: her unquestionable womanliness emphasizes the
    completeness of my transformation. As we walked up the broad
    stairs of my palazzo, amid its princely wealth and beauty, I
    suddenly thought:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Why not send all this adventure to the devil? Why not simply
    wed and live like a prince in this palace? There will be
    freedom, children, laughter, just earthly happiness and
    love.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And again I looked at Magnus. He seemed strange to me: “I
    will take your money!” Then I saw the stern gaze of my
    Maria—and the contradiction between her love and this plan of
    simple, modest happiness was so great and emphatic that my
    thought did not even require an answer. I now recollect this
    thought accidentally as a curiosity of “Toppism.” Let me call
    it “Toppism” in honor of my perfect Toppi.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The evening was charming. At Magnus’ request, Maria sang. You
    cannot imagine the reverence

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_165">165</a></span>

    with which Toppi
    listened to her singing! He dared not utter a word to
    Maria, but on leaving he shook my hand long and with
    particular warmth. Then, similarly, he shook the hand of
    Magnus. I also rose to retire.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do you intend to do some work yet, Magnus?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No. Don’t you want to go to sleep, Wondergood? Come to my
    room. We’ll chat a bit. Incidentally, there is a paper for
    you to sign. Do you want any wine?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, with pleasure, Magnus. I love conversation at night.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We drank the wine. Magnus, whistling something out of tune,
    silently walked the carpet, while I, as usual, reclined in a
    chair. The Palazzo was all silence, like a sarcophagus, and
    this reminded me of that stirring night when Mad Mars raved
    behind the wall. Suddenly, Magnus exclaimed loudly, without
    hesitation:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The affair is progressing splendidly.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “So?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “In two weeks everything will be completed. Your swollen,
    scattered wealth, in which one can be lost as in a wood, will
    be transformed into a clear, concise and exact sack of
    gold...to be more correct—into a mountain. Do you know the
    exact estimate of your money, Wondergood?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_166">166</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, don’t, Magnus. I don’t want to know it. Moreover, it’s
    your money.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus looked at me quickly and said sharply:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, it’s yours.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I shrugged my shoulders. I did not want to argue. It was so
    quiet and I so enjoyed watching this strong man silently
    pacing to and fro. I still remembered his motionless, stern
    back, behind which I could clearly see his heart. He
    continued, after a pause:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do you know, Wondergood, that the Cardinal has been here?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The old monkey? Yes, I know. What did he want?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The same thing. He wanted to see you but I did not feel like
    taking you away from your thoughts.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Thanks. Did you drive him out?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus replied angrily:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am sorry to say,—no. Don’t put on airs, Wondergood: I have
    already told you that we must be careful of him as long as we
    remain here. But you are quite right. He is an old, shaven,
    useless, evil, gluttonous, cowardly monkey!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Ah, ah! Then why not show him the door?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Impossible.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I believe you, Magnus. And what does this

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_167">167</a></span>

    king I hear about want, he
    who is to visit us some of these days?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Ex-king. Probably the same thing. You should receive him
    yourself, of course.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But only in your presence. Otherwise I refuse. You must
    understand, my friend, that from that memorable night on I
    have been merely your disciple. You find it impossible to
    drive out the old monkey? Very well, let him remain. You say
    we must receive some ex-king? Very well, receive him. But I
    would rather be hanged on the first lamppost than to do so
    without knowing your reason.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are jesting again, Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, I am <em>quite</em> serious, Magnus. But I swear by
    eternal salvation that I know not what we are doing or intend
    to do. I am not reproaching you. I am not even questioning
    you: as I have already told you, I trust you and am ready to
    follow your directions. That you may not again reproach me
    with levity and impracticability, I may add a little business
    detail: Maria and her love are my hostages. Moreover, I do
    not yet know to what you intend to devote your energy, of
    whose boundlessness I am becoming more convinced each day;
    what plans and ends your experience and mind have set before
    you. But of one thing I have no doubt: they will be huge
    plans, great objects. And

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_168">168</a></span>

    I, too, shall always find
    something to do beside you...at any rate this will be
    much better than my brainless old women and six
    secretaries. Why do you refuse to believe in my modesty,
    as I believe in your...genius. Imagine that I am come
    from some other planet, from Mars, for instance, and wish
    in the most serious manner possible, to pass through the
    experience of a <em>man</em>.... It is all very simple,
    Magnus!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus frowned at me for a few moments and suddenly broke
    into laughter:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You certainly are a pilgrim from some other planet,
    Wondergood!... And what if I should devote your gold to doing
    evil?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Why? Is that so very interesting?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Hm!... You think <em>that is</em> not interesting?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, and so do you. You are too big a man to do little evil,
    just as billions constitute too much money, while honestly as
    far as great evil is concerned, I know not yet what <em>great
    evil</em> is? Perhaps it is really <em>great good</em>? In
    my recent contemplations, there...came to me a strange
    thought: Who is of greater <em>use</em> to man—he who hates
    or he who loves him? You see, Magnus, how ignorant I still am
    of human affairs and...how ready I am for almost anything.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Without laughter and, with what seemed to me, extreme
    curiosity, Magnus measured me with his

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_169">169</a></span>

    eyes, as if he were deciding
    the question: is this a fool I see before me, or the
    foremost sage of America? Judging by his subsequent
    question he was nearer the second opinion:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “So, if I have correctly understood your words, you are
    afraid of <em>nothing</em>, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I think <em>not</em>.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And murder...many murders?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You remember the point you made in your story about the boy
    of the <em>boundary</em> of the human? In order that there
    may be no mistake, I have moved it forward several
    kilometers. Will that be enough?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Something like respect arose in Magnus’ eyes...the devil
    take him, though, he really considers me a clod! Continuing
    to pace the room, he looked at me curiously several times, as
    if he were trying to recall and verify my remark. Then, with
    a quick movement, he touched my shoulders:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You have an active mind, Wondergood. It is a pity I did not
    come to know you before.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Why?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Just so. I am interested to know how you will speak to the
    king: he will probably suggest something very evil to you.
    And great evil is great good. Is that not so?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He again broke into laughter and shook his head in a friendly
    fashion.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_170">170</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I don’t think so. The chances are he will propose something
    very silly.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Hm!... And is that not great wisdom?” He laughed again but
    frowned suddenly and added seriously: “Do not feel hurt,
    Wondergood. I liked what you said very much and it is well
    you do not put any questions to me at this time: I could not
    answer them just now. But there is something I can say even
    now...in general terms, of course. Are you listening?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am all attention.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus seated himself opposite me and, taking a sip of wine,
    asked with strange seriousness:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “How do you regard explosives?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “With great respect.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes? That is cold praise, but, I dare say, they don’t
    deserve much more. Yet, there was a time when I worshiped
    dynamite as I do frankness...this scar on my brow is the
    result of my youthful enthusiasm. Since then I have made
    great strides in chemistry—and other things—and this has
    cooled my zeal. The drawback of every explosive, beginning
    with powder, is that the explosion is confined to a limited
    space and strikes only the things near at hand: it might do
    for war, of course, but it is quite inadequate where bigger
    things are concerned. Besides, being a thing of material
    limitations, dynamite or powder

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_171">171</a></span>

    demands a constantly guiding
    hand: in itself, it is dumb, blind and deaf, like a mole.
    To be sure, in Whitehead’s mine we find an attempt to
    create consciousness, giving the shell the power to
    correct, so to speak, certain mistakes and to maintain a
    certain aim, but that is only a pitiful parody on
    eyesight....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And you want your ‘dynamite’ to have consciousness, will and
    eyes?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are right. That is what I want. And my new
    <em>dynamite</em> does have these attributes: will,
    consciousness, eyes.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And what is your aim? But this sounds...terrible.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus smiled faintly.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Terrible? I fear your terror will turn to laughter when I
    give you the name of my dynamite. It is <em>man</em>. Have
    you never looked at man from this point of view, Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I confess,—no. Does dynamite, too, belong to the domain of
    psychology? This is all very ridiculous.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Chemistry, psychology!” cried Magnus, angrily: “that is all
    because knowledge has been subdivided into so many different
    subjects, just as a hand with ten fingers is now a rarity.
    You and your Toppi—all of us are explosive shells, some
    loaded and ready, others still to be loaded.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_172">172</a></span>

    And the crux of the matter
    lies, you understand, in how to load the shell and, what
    is still more important: how to explode it. You know, of
    course, that the method of exploding various preparations
    depends upon their respective compositions?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am not going to repeat here the lecture on explosives given
    me by Magnus with great zeal and enthusiasm: it was the first
    time I had seen him in such a state of excitement. Despite
    the absorbing interest of the subject, as my friends the
    journalists would say, I heard only half the things he was
    saying and concentrated most of my attention on his skull,
    the skull which contained such wide and dangerous knowledge.
    Whether it was due to the conviction carried in Magnus’
    words, or to pure weariness—I know not which—this round
    skull, blazing with the flames of his eyes, gradually assumed
    the character of a real, explosive shell, of a bomb, with the
    fuse lit for action.... I trembled when Magnus carelessly
    threw upon the table a heavy object resembling a cake of
    grayish-yellow soap, and exclaimed involuntarily:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What’s that?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It looks like soap or wax. But it has the force of a devil.
    One half of this would be enough to blow St. Peter’s into
    bits. It is a capricious

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_173">173</a></span>

    Devil. You may kick it about
    or chop it into pieces, you may burn it in your stove, it
    will remain ever silent: a dynamite shell may tear it
    apart yet it will not rouse its wrath. I may throw it into
    the street, beneath the hoofs of horses; the dogs may bite
    at it and children may play with it—and still it remains
    indifferent. But I need only apply a current of high
    pressure to it—and the force of the explosion will be
    monstrous, limitless. A strong but silly devil!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    With equal carelessness, bordering almost upon contempt,
    Magnus threw his devil back into the table drawer and looked
    at me sternly. My eyebrows twitched slightly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I see you know your subject to perfection, and I rather like
    this capricious devil of yours. But I would like to hear you
    discuss <em>man</em>.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus laughed:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And was it not of him I have just spoken? Is not the history
    of this piece of soap the history of your <em>man</em>, who
    can be beaten, burned, hacked to bits, hurled beneath the
    hoofs of horses, thrown to the dogs, torn into shreds—without
    rousing his consuming wrath or even his anger? But prick him
    with <em>something</em> —and the explosion will be
    terrible...as you will learn, Mr. Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He laughed again and rubbed his white hands with pleasure: he
    scarcely remembered at that

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_174">174</a></span>

    moment that human blood was
    already upon them. And is it really necessary for
    <em>man</em> to remember that? After a pause commensurate
    with the respect due to the subject, I asked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And do you know how to make a <em>man</em> explode?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Certainly.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And would you consider it permissible to give me this
    information?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Unfortunately it is not so easy or convenient because the
    current of high pressure would require too much elucidation,
    dear Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Can’t you put it briefly?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, briefly. Well, it is necessary to promise man some
    <em>miracle</em>.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Is that all?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “That is all.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Lies once more? The old monkey?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, lies again. But not the old monkey. It is not that I
    have in mind. Neither crusades nor immortality in heaven.
    This is the period of other miracles and other wonders. He
    promised resurrection to the dead. I promise resurrection to
    the living. His followers were the dead. Mine...ours—are
    the living.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But the dead <em>did not arise</em>. How about the living?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Who <em>knows? We must make an experiment.</em>
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_175">175</a></span>

    I cannot yet confide in you the business
    end of the enterprise but I warn you: the experiment must
    be conducted on a very large scale. You are not afraid,
    Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I shrugged my shoulders indicating nothing definite. What
    could I answer? This gentleman carrying upon his shoulders a
    bomb instead of a head again split me into two halves, of
    which <em>man</em>, alas, was the lesser one. As Wondergood,
    I confess without shame, I felt cruel fear and even pain:
    just as if the monstrous explosion had already touched my
    bones and were now breaking them...ah, but where is my
    endless happiness with Maria, where the boundless peace of
    mind, where the devil is that white schooner? No, as Great
    Immortal Curiosity, as the genius of <em>play</em> and
    eternal movement, as the rapacious gaze of unclosing eyes I
    felt—I confess this, too, without shame—great joy, bordering
    upon ecstasy! And with a shiver of delight I mumbled:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What a pity I did not know that before.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Why a pity?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, just so. Do not forget that I am come from another
    planet and am only now getting acquainted with man. So what
    shall we do with this—planet—Magnus?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He laughed again:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are a strange fellow, Wondergood! With

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_176">176</a></span>

    this planet? We will give it
    a little holiday. But enough jesting. I do not like it!”
    He frowned angrily and looked at me sternly, like an old
    professor...the manner of this gentleman was not
    distinguished by flippancy. When it seemed to him that I
    had grown sufficiently serious he shook his head in
    approval and asked: “Do you know, Wondergood, that the
    whole of Europe is now in a very uneasy state?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “War?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Possibly war. Everybody is secretly expecting it.
    <em>But</em> war precedes the belief in the kingdom of
    <em>miracles</em>. You understand: we have lived too long in
    simple faith in the multiplication table, <em>we</em> are
    tired of the multiplication table, <em>we</em> are filled
    with ennui and anxiety on this straight road whose mire is
    lost in infinity. Just now all of us are demanding some
    miracle and soon the day will come when we will demand the
    miracle immediately! It is not I alone who wants <em>an
    experiment on a large scale</em> —the whole world is
    preparing it...ah, Wondergood, in truth, life would not be
    worth the candle if it were not for these highly interesting
    moments! Highly interesting!” He greedily rubbed his hands.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are pleased?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “As a chemist, I am in ecstasy. My shells are already loaded,
    without being themselves conscious

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_177">177</a></span>

    of the fact, but they
    will know it well enough when I apply the torch. Can you
    imagine the sight when <em>my</em> dynamite will begin to
    explode, its consciousness, its will, its eyes directed
    straight upon its goal?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And blood? Perhaps my reminder is out of place but I
    remember an occasion when you spoke of <em>blood</em> with
    much excitement.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus fixed his long gaze upon me: something akin to
    suffering appeared in his eyes: But this was not the prick of
    conscience or pity—it was the emotion of a mature and wise
    man whose thoughts had been interrupted by the foolish
    question of a child: “Blood,” he said, “what blood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I recalled to him his words on that occasion and told him of
    my strange and extremely unpleasant dream about the bottles,
    filled with blood instead of wine, and so easily broken.
    Weary, with his eyes closed, he listened to my tale and
    sighed heavily.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Blood!”—he murmured: “blood! that’s nonsense. I told you
    many trite things on that occasion, Wondergood, and it is not
    worth while to recall them. However, if <em>this</em> gives
    you fear, it is not too late.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I replied resolutely:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I fear <em>nothing</em>. As I have already said, I shall
    follow you everywhere. It is <em>my</em> blood that

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_178">178</a></span>

    is protesting—you
    understand?—not my consciousness or will. Apparently I
    shall be the first to be fooled by you: I, too, seek a
    miracle. Is not your <em>Maria</em> a miracle? I have been
    repeating the multiplication table night and day and I
    have grown to hate it like the bars of a prison. From the
    point of view of your chemistry, I am quite loaded and I
    ask but one thing: blow me up as quickly as possible!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus agreed sternly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Very well. In about two weeks. Are you satisfied?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Thank you. I hope that Signorina Maria will then become my
    wife?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus laughed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Madonna?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, I don’t understand your smile...and, I must say, my
    hope is altogether in conformity with the regard I bear for
    your daughter, Signor Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Don’t excite yourself, Wondergood. My smile was not about
    Maria but about your faith in miracles. You are a splendid
    fellow, Wondergood. I am beginning to love you like a son. In
    two weeks you will receive everything and then we shall
    conclude a new and strong pact. Your hand, comrade!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    For the first time he shook my hand in a strong,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_179">179</a></span>

    comradely fashion. I would
    have kissed him if there had been a simple human head
    instead of a bomb upon his shoulders. But to touch a bomb!
    Not even in the face of my utmost respect for him!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    That was the first night that I slept like one slain and the
    stone walls of the palace did not press upon me. The walls
    were brushed by the explosive power of Magnus’ speech, while
    the roof melted away beneath the starry coverlet of Maria: my
    soul departed into the realms of her calm love and refuge.
    The mountain Tivoli and its fires—that was what I saw as I
    fell into slumber.</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      April 8, Rome.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    Before knocking at my door, His Majesty, the ex-King E. had
    knocked at no small number of entrances in Europe. True to
    the example of his apostolic ancestors, who believed in the
    gold of Israel, he particularly liked to approach Jewish
    bankers; I believe that the honor done me by his visit was
    based upon his firm conviction that I was a Jew. Although His
    Majesty was visiting Rome incognito, I, warned of his visit,
    met him at the foot of the stairs and bowed low to him—I
    think that is the requirement of etiquette. Then, also in
    accordance with etiquette, we introduced

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_180">180</a></span>

    ourselves, he—his adjutant, I—Thomas Magnus.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I confess I had not a very flattering opinion of the former
    king and that is why he astonished me all the more with his
    high opinion of himself. He gave me his hand politely but
    with such haughty indifference, he looked at me with such
    complete self-confidence, as if he were gazing at a being of
    a lower order, he walked ahead of me so naturally, sat down
    without invitation, gazed upon the walls and furniture in
    such frankly royal manner, that my entire uneasiness due to
    my unfamiliarity with etiquette disappeared immediately. It
    was only necessary to follow this fellow, who appeared to
    know everything so well. In appearance he was quite a young
    man, with fresh complexion and magnificent coiffure, somewhat
    worn out but sufficiently well-preserved, with colorless eyes
    and a calm, brazenly protruding lower lip. His hands were
    beautiful. He did not try to conceal that he was bored by my
    American face, which appeared Jewish to him, and by the
    necessity of asking me for money: he yawned slightly after
    seating himself and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Sit down, gentlemen.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And with a slight command of the hand he ordered the adjutant
    to state the nature of his proposal. He paid no attention to
    Magnus at all, and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_181">181</a></span>

    while the fat, red and
    obliging adjutant was stealthily narrating the story of
    the “misunderstanding” which caused the departure of His
    Majesty from his country—His Majesty was nonchalantly
    examining his feet. Finally, he interrupted his
    representative’s speech with the impatient remark:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Briefer, Marquis. Mr....Wondergood is as well familiar with
    this history as we are. In a word, these fools kicked me out.
    How do you regard it, dear Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “How do I regard it?” I bowed low:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am glad to be of service to Your Majesty.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, yes, that’s what they all say. But will you give me
    any money? Continue, Marquis.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The Marquis, smiling gently at me and Magnus (despite his
    obesity he looked quite hungry) continued to weave his thin
    flimsy web about the misunderstanding, until the bored king
    again interrupted him:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You understand: these fools thought that I was responsible
    for all their misfortunes. Wasn’t that silly, Mr. Wondergood?
    And now they are worse off than ever and they write: ‘Come
    back, for God’s sake. We are perishing!’ Read the letters,
    Marquis.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    At first the king spoke with a trace of excitement but
    apparently any effort soon wearied him.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_182">182</a></span>

    The Marquis obediently took a
    packet of papers from the portfolio and tortured us with
    the complaints of the orphaned subjects, begging their
    lord to return. I looked at the king: he was no less bored
    than we were. It was so clear to him that the people could
    not exist without him that all confirmations of this
    seemed superfluous.... And I felt so strange: whence does
    this miserable man get so much happy confidence? There was
    no doubt that this bird, unable to find a crumb for
    himself, sincerely believed in the peculiar qualities of
    his personage, capable of bestowing upon a whole people
    marvelous benefactions. Stupidity? Training? Habit? At
    that moment the marquis was reading the plea of some
    correspondent, in which, through the web of official
    mediocrity and the lies of swollen phrases, gleamed the
    very same confidence and sincere call. Was that, too,
    stupidity and habit?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And so forth, and so forth,” interrupted the king
    listlessly: “that will do, Marquis, you may close your
    portfolio. Well, what you think of it, dear Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I will be bold enough to say to Your Majesty that I am a
    representative of an old, democratic republic and....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Stop, Wondergood! Republic, democracy! That’s nonsense. You
    know well enough yourself

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_183">183</a></span>

    that a king is a necessity.
    You, in America, will have a king, too, some day. How can
    you get along without a king: who will be responsible for
    them before God? No, that’s foolish.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    This creature was actually getting ready to answer for the
    people before God! And he continued with the same calm
    audacity:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The king can do everything. And what can a president do?
    Nothing. Do you understand, Wondergood—<em>Nothing!</em> Why,
    then, do you want a president who can do nothing?”—he deigned
    to twist his lower lip into a sarcastic smile.—“It is all
    nonsense, invented by the newspapers. Would you, for example,
    take your president seriously, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But representative government....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Fi! Excuse me, Mr. Wondergood (he recalled my name with
    great difficulty) but what fool will pay any attention to the
    representatives of the people? Citizen A will pay heed to
    Citizen B and Citizen B will pay heed to Citizen A—is that
    not so? But who will compel their obedience if both of them
    are wise? No, I, too, have studied logic, Mr. Wondergood and
    you will permit me to indulge in a laugh!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He laughed slightly and said with his usual gesture:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Continue, Marquis.... No, let me do it. The

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_184">184</a></span>

    King can do
    <em>everything</em>, Wondergood, you understand?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But the law....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Ah, this fellow, too, speaks of law. Do you hear, Marquis?
    No, I really can’t understand what you want this law for!
    That all may suffer equitably! However, if you are so keen on
    having law, law you shall have. But who will give it to you,
    if not I?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But the representatives of the people....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The king directed his colorless eyes upon me, almost in
    despair:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Ah, again citizen A and B! But can’t you understand, dear
    Wondergood? What kind of a law is it if they themselves make
    it? What wise man will agree to obey it? No, that’s nonsense.
    Is it possible that you yourself obey this law, Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Not only I, Your Majesty, but the whole of America....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    His eyes measured me with sympathy.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Pardon me, but I don’t believe it. The whole of America!
    Well, in that case they simply don’t understand what law
    is—do you hear, Marquis, the whole of America! But that’s not
    the thing. I must return, Wondergood. You’ve heard what the
    poor devils write?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_185">185</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am happy to see that the road is open for you, my lord.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Open? You think so? Hm! No, I need money. Some write and
    others don’t, you understand?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Perhaps they don’t know how to write, my lord?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “They? Oh! You should have seen what they wrote against me. I
    was quite flustered. What they need is the firing squad.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “All of them?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Why all of them? Some of them will be enough. The rest of
    them will simply be scared to death. You understand,
    Wondergood, they have simply stolen my power from me and now,
    of course, will simply refuse to return it. You can’t expect
    me to see to it that no one robs me. And these gentlemen,”—he
    indicated the blushing Marquis—“to my sorrow did not manage
    to guard my interests.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The Marquis mumbled confusedly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Sire!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Now, now, I know your devotion, but you were asleep at the
    switch just the same? And now there is so much trouble, so
    much trouble!”—he sighed lightly. “Did not Cardinal X. tell
    you I needed money, Mr. Wondergood? He promised to. Of course
    I will return it all and...however,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_186">186</a></span>

    you should take this
    matter up with the Marquis. I have heard that you love
    people very much, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    A faint smile flitted over the dim face of Magnus. I bowed
    slightly.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The Cardinal told me so. That is very praiseworthy, Mr.
    Wondergood. But if you do love people you will certainly give
    me money. I don’t doubt that in the least. They must have a
    king. The newspapers are merely prattling nonsense. Why do
    they have a king in Germany, a king in England, a king in
    Italy, and a hundred other kings? And don’t we need a king
    too?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The adjutant mumbled:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “A misunderstanding....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Of course a misunderstanding. The Marquis is quite right.
    The newspapers call it a revolution, but believe me, I know
    my people; it is simply a misunderstanding. They are now
    weeping themselves. How can they get along without a king?
    There would be no kings at all then. You understand? What
    nonsense! They now talk of no God, too. No, we must do a
    little shooting, a little shooting!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He rose quickly and this time shook my hand with a
    patronizing smile and bowed to Magnus.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Good-by, good-by, my dear Wondergood. You have a magnificent
    figure.... Oh, what a

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_187">187</a></span>

    splendid fellow! The Marquis
    will drop in to see you one of these days. There was
    something more I wanted to say. Oh, yes: I hope that you
    in America will have a king, too, in the near future...that
    is very essential, my friend. Moreover, that’s bound
    to be the end! Au revoir!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We escorted His Majesty with the same ceremony. The Marquis
    followed and his bowed head, divided into two halves by the
    part in his reddish hair, and his red face bore the
    expression of hunger and constant failure.... Ah, he has so
    frequently and so fruitlessly orated about that
    ‘misunderstanding’! The King, apparently, also recalled at
    that moment his vain knocking about at other thresholds: his
    bloodless face again filled with grayish ennui and in reply
    to my parting bow, he opened wide his eyes, as if in
    astonishment, with the expression: what more does this fool
    want? Ah, yes, he has money. And lazily he asked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And so, you’ll not forget, Mr....friend!” And his
    automobile was magnificent and just as magnificent was the
    huge chauffeur, resembling a gendarme, attired for the new
    rôle. When we had reascended the stairs (our respectful
    lackeys meanwhile gazing upon me as on a royal personage) and
    entered our apartments, Magnus fell into a long, ironic
    silence. I asked:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_188">188</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “How old is this creature?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Didn’t you know, Wondergood? That’s bad. He is 32 years old.
    Perhaps less.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Did the Cardinal really speak of him and ask you to give him
    money?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes,—from what you may have left after the Cardinal’s wants
    are attended to.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “That is probably due to the fact that the monarchist form of
    government is also in vogue in heaven. Can you conceive of a
    republic of saints and the administration of the world on the
    basis of popular representation? Think of it: even devils
    will then receive the vote. A King is most necessary,
    Wondergood. Believe me.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Nonsense! This is not worthy even of a jest.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am not jesting. You are mistaken. And pardon me for being
    so direct, my friend: in his discussion about kings
    <em>he</em> was above you, this time. You saw only a
    creature, a countenance of purely material limitations and
    ridiculous. <em>He</em> conceived himself to be a symbol.
    That is why he is so calm and there is no doubt that he will
    return to his beloved people.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And will do a little shooting.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And will do a little shooting. And will throw a little scare
    into them. Ah, Wondergood, how stubborn you are in your
    refusal to part with the multiplication table! Your republic
    is a simple

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_189">189</a></span>

    table, while a king—do you
    realize it?—is a <em>miracle</em>! What can there be
    simpler, sillier and more hopeless than a million bearded
    men, governing themselves,—and how wonderful, how
    miraculous when this million of bearded fellows are
    governed by a creature! That is a miracle! And what
    possibilities it gives rise to! It seemed very funny to me
    when you spoke with so much warmth about the law, this
    dream of the devil. A king is necessary for the precise
    purpose of <em>breaking</em> the law, in order that the
    <em>will</em> may be <em>above</em> the law!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But laws change, Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “To change is only to submit to necessity and to new law,
    which was unknown to you before. Only by breaking the law do
    you elevate the <em>will</em>. Prove to me that God himself
    is subject to his own laws, i.e., to put it simply, that he
    cannot perform miracles, and to-morrow your shaven monkey
    will share the fate of loneliness and all the churches will
    be turned into horse stables. The miracle, Wondergood, the
    miracle—that is what holds human beings on this cursed
    earth!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus emphasized these words by banging the table with his
    fist. His face was gloomy. In his dark eyes there flickered
    unusual excitement. Speaking as if he were threatening some
    one, he continued:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_190">190</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “<em>He</em> believes in miracles and I envy him. He is
    insignificant, he is really what you might call a creature,
    but he believes in miracles. And he has already been a king
    and will be a king again! And we!...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He waved his hand contemptuously and began to pace the carpet
    like an angry captain on the deck of <em>his</em> vessel.
    With much respect I gazed upon his heavy, explosive head and
    blazing eyes: for the first time I realized what
    <em>Satanic</em> ambitions there were concealed in this
    strange gentlemen. “And we!” Magnus noticed my gaze and
    shouted angrily:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Why do you look at me like that, Wondergood? It’s silly! You
    are thinking of my ambition? That’s foolish, Wondergood!
    Would not <em>you</em>, a gentleman of Illinois, also like
    to be...well, at least, Emperor of <em>Russia</em>, where
    the <em>will</em> is still above the law?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And on what particular throne have you your eye, Magnus?” I
    replied, no longer concealing my irony.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “If you are pleased to think of me so flatteringly,
    Wondergood, I will tell you that I <em>aim</em> much higher.
    Nonsense, my friend! Only bloodless moralists have never
    dreamt of a crown, just as only eunuchs have never tempted
    themselves with the thought of woman. Nonsense! But I do
    not

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_191">191</a></span>

    seek a throne—not even the
    Russian throne: it is too cramping.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But there is another throne, Signor Magnus: the throne of
    God.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But why only the throne of God? And have you forgotten
    Satan’s, Mr. Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And this he said to Me...or did the whole street know that
    my throne was vacant? I bowed my head respectfully and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Permit me to be the first to greet you...Your Majesty.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus turned on me in wild wrath, gnashing his teeth, like a
    dog over a contested bone. And this angry atom wants to be
    Satan! This handful of earth, hardly enough for one whiff for
    the Devil, is dreaming to be crowned with my crown! I bowed
    my head still lower and dropped my eyes: I felt the gleaming
    flame of contempt and divine laughter blazing forth within
    them. I realized that it must not be given to my honored ward
    to know this <em>laughter</em>. I do not know how long we
    remained silent, but when our eyes met again they were clear,
    pure and innocent, like two bright rays in the shade. Magnus
    was the first to speak:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And so?” he said.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And so?” I replied.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Will you order money for the king?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_192">192</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The money is at your disposal, my dear friend.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus looked at me thoughtfully.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It’s not worth while,” he decided. “This miracle is old
    stuff. It requires too many police to compel belief. We shall
    perform a better miracle.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, undoubtedly. We shall contrive a better device. In two
    weeks?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, about that!” replied Magnus cordially.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We shook hands warmly in parting and in about two hours the
    gracious king sent each of us a decoration: some sort of a
    star for me and something else for Magnus. I rather pitied
    the poor idiot who continued to play his lone hand.</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      April 16, Rome.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    Maria is somewhat indisposed and I hardly see her. Magnus
    informed me of her illness—and lied about it: for some reason
    he does not want me to see her. Does he fear anything?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Again Cardinal X. called on him in my absence. Nothing is
    being said to me about the “miracle.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But I am patient,—and I wait. At first this was rather
    boresome but recently I have found a new pastime and now I am
    quite content. It is the Roman museums, where I spend my
    mornings, like a conscientious American who has
    just

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_193">193</a></span>

    learned to distinguish
    between a painting and a piece of sculpture. But I have no
    Baedecker with me and I am strangely happy that I don’t
    understand a thing about it all: marble and painting. I
    merely like it.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I like the odor of the sea in the museums. Why the sea?—I do
    not know: the sea is far away and I rather expected the odor
    of decay. And it is so spacious here—much more spacious than
    the Campagna. In the Campagna I see only space, over which
    run trains and automobiles. Here I swim in time. There is so
    much time here! Then, too, I rather like the fact that here
    they preserve with great care a chip of a marble foot or a
    stony sole with a bit of the heel. Like an ass from Illinois,
    I simply cannot understand what value there is in this, but I
    already believe that it is valuable and I am touched by your
    careful thrift, little man! Preserve it! Go on breaking the
    feet of live men. That is nothing. But these you must
    preserve. It is good, indeed, when living, dying, ever
    changing men, for the space of 2000 years, take such good
    care of a chip of marble foot.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    When I enter the narrow museum from the Roman street, where
    every stone is drowned in the light of the April sun, its
    transparent and even shadow seems to me a peculiar light,
    more durable than the expensive rays of the sun. As

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_194">194</a></span>

    far as I <em>recollect</em>
    it is thus that eternity doth shine. And these marbles!
    They have swallowed as much sunlight as an Englishman
    whiskey before they were driven into this place that they
    do not fear night at all.... And I, too, do not fear the
    night when I am near them. Take care of them, man!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    If <em>this</em> is what you call art, what an ass you are,
    Wondergood. Of course, you are cultured, you look upon art
    with reverence as upon religion and you have understood as
    much of it as that ass did on which the Messiah entered
    Jerusalem. And what if there should be a fire? Yesterday this
    thought troubled me all day and I went with it to Magnus. But
    he seems extremely occupied with something and could not, at
    first, understand what I was driving at.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What’s the trouble, Wondergood? You want to insure the
    Vatican—or something else? Make it clearer?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh! to insure!” I exclaimed in anger: “you are a barbarian,
    Thomas Magnus!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    At last he understood. Smiling cordially, he stretched,
    yawned and laid some paper before me.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You really are a gentleman from Mars, dear Wondergood. Don’t
    contradict, and sign this paper. It is the last one.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_195">195</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I will sign, but under one condition. Your explosion must
    not touch the Vatican.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He laughed again:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Would you be sorry? Then you had better not sign. In
    general, if you are sorry about anything—about anything at
    all—it would be better for us to part before it is too late.
    There is no room for pity in my game and my play is not for
    sentimental American girls.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “If you please....” I signed the paper and threw it aside.
    “But it seems as if you have earnestly entered upon the
    duties of Satan, dear Magnus!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And does Satan have duties? Poor Satan! Then I don’t want to
    be Satan!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Neither duties nor obligations?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Neither duties nor obligations.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And what then?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He glanced at me quickly with his gleaming eyes and replied
    with one short word, which cut the air before my face:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “<em>Will.</em> ”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And...the current of high pressure?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus smiled patronizingly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am very glad that you remember my words so well,
    Wondergood. They may be of use to you some day.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Cursed dog. I felt so much like striking him

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_196">196</a></span>

    that I—bowed particularly low
    and politely. But he restrained me with a gracious
    gesture, pointing to a chair:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Where are you going, Wondergood? Sit down. We have seen so
    little of each other of late. How is your health?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Fine, thank you. And how is the health of Signorina Maria?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Not particularly good. But it’s a trifle. A few more days of
    waiting and you.... So you like the museums, Wondergood?
    There was a time when I, too, gave them much time and
    feeling. Yes, I remember, I remember.... Don’t you find,
    Wondergood, that man, in mass, is a repulsive being?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I raised my eyes in astonishment:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I do not quite understand this change of subject, Magnus. On
    the contrary, the museums have revealed to me a new and more
    attractive side of man....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He laughed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Love for mankind?... Well, well, do not take offense at the
    jest, Wondergood. You see: everything that man does in crayon
    is wonderful—but repulsive in painting. Take the sketch of
    Christianity, with its sermon on the Mount, its lilies and
    its ears of corn, how marvelous it is! And how ugly is its
    picture with its sextons, its

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_197">197</a></span>

    funeral pyres and its
    Cardinal X.! A genius begins the work and an idiot, an
    animal, completes it. The pure and fresh wave of the ocean
    tide strikes the dirty shore—and returns dirty, bearing
    back with it corks and shells. The beginning of love, the
    beginning of the Roman Empire and the great revolution—how
    good are all beginnings! And their end? And even if a man
    here and there has managed to die as beautifully as he was
    born, the masses, the masses, Wondergood, invariably end
    the liturgy in shamelessness!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, but what about the causes, Magnus?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The causes? Apparently we find concealed here the very
    <em>substance</em> of man, of animal, evil and limited in the
    mass, inclined to madness, easily inoculated with all sorts
    of disease and crowning the widest possible road with a
    standstill. And that is why Art is so much above Man!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I do not understand.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “<em>What</em> is there incomprehensible about it? In art it
    is the genius who begins and the genius completes. You
    understand: the genius! the fool, the imitator or the critic
    is quite powerless to change or mar the paintings of
    Velasquez, the sculpture of Angelo or the verse of Homer. He
    can destroy, smash, break, burn or deface, but he is quite
    powerless to bring them down to his own level—and that is why
    he so detests real art.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_198">198</a></span>

    You understand, Wondergood? His paw is helpless!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus waved his white hand and laughed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But why does he guard and protect it so assiduously?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It is not <em>he</em> who guards and protects. This is done
    by a special species of <em>faithful watchmen</em> ”—Magnus
    laughed again: “and did you observe how uncomfortable they
    feel in the museum?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Who—they?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, those who came to view the things! But the most
    ridiculous phase of the whole business is not that the fool
    is a fool but that the genius unswervedly worships the fool
    as a neighbor and fellow being and anxiously seeks his
    devastating love. As if he were a savage himself, the genius
    does not understand that <em>his</em> true neighbor is a
    genius similar to himself and he is eternally opening his
    embraces to the near—human...who eagerly crawls into them
    in order to abstract the watch from his vest pocket! Yes, my
    dear Wondergood, it is a most laughable point and I fear....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He lapsed into thought, fixing his eyes upon the floor: thus
    apparently do human beings gaze into the depths of their own
    graves. And I understood just what this genius feared, and
    once again I bowed before the Satanic mind which in all
    the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_199">199</a></span>

    world recognized only itself
    and its own will. Here was a god who would not share his
    power with Olympus! And what a contempt for mankind! And
    what open contempt for me! Here was a grain of earth that
    could make the devil himself sneeze!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And do you know how I concluded that evening? I took my pious
    Toppi by the neck and threatened to shoot him if he did not
    get drunk with me. And drunk we did get! We began in some
    dirty little café and continued in some night taverns where I
    generously filled some black-eyed bandits with liquor,
    mandolin players and singers, who sang to me of Maria: I
    drank like a farm hand who had just arrived in the city after
    a year of sober labor. Away with the museums! I remember that
    I shouted much and waved my hands—but never did I love my
    <em>Maria</em> so tenderly, so sweetly and so painfully as in
    that smoke of drink, permeated with the odor of wine, oranges
    and some burning fat, in this wide circle of black bearded
    stealthy faces and rapaciously gleaming eyes, amid the
    melodious strains of mandolins which opened for me the very
    vestibules of heaven and hell!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I vaguely remember some very accommodating but pompous
    murderers, whom I kissed and forgave in the name of Maria. I
    remember that I proposed that all of us go to drink in the
    Coliseum,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_200">200</a></span>

    in the very place where
    martyrs used to die but I do not know why we did not do
    it—I believe there were technical difficulties. And how
    splendid Toppi was! At first he drank long and silently,
    like an archbishop. Then he suddenly began to perform
    interesting feats. He put a bottle of Chianti on his nose,
    the wine running all over him. He tried to perform some
    tricks with cards but was immediately caught by the
    affable bandits who brilliantly repeated the same trick.
    He walked on all fours and sang some religious verses
    through his nose. He cried and suddenly announced frankly
    that he was a devil.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We walked home staggering along the street, bumping into
    walls and lampposts and hilariously enjoying ourselves like
    two students. Toppi tried to pick a quarrel with some
    policemen, but, touched by their politeness, he ended by
    conferring his stern blessing upon them, saying gloomily:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Go and sin no more.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Then he confessed with tears that he was in love with a
    certain signorina, that his love was requited and that he
    must therefore resign his spiritual calling. Saying this, he
    lay down upon a stony threshold and fell into a stubborn
    sleep. And thus I left him.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Maria, Maria, how you tempt me! Not once

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_201">201</a></span>

    have I touched your lips.
    Yesterday I kissed only red wine...but whence come these
    burning traces on my lips? But yesterday I stood upon my
    knees, Madonna, and covered you with flowers: but
    yesterday I timidly laid hands upon the hem of your
    garment, and to-day you are only a woman and I want you.
    My hands are trembling. The obstacles, the halls, the
    paces and the thresholds separating us drive me mad. I
    want you! I did not recognize my own eyes in the mirror:
    there is a thick shadow upon them. I breathe heavily and
    irregularly, and all day long my thoughts are wandering
    lustfully about your naked breast. I have forgotten
    everything.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    In whose power am I? It bends me like soft, heated iron. I am
    deafened, I am blinded by my own heat and sparks. What do you
    do, man, when <em>that</em> happens to you? Do you simply go
    and take the woman? Do you violate her? Think: it is night
    now and Maria is so close by. I can approach her room without
    a sound...and I want to hear her cries! But suppose Magnus
    bars the road for me? I will kill Magnus.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Nonsense.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    No, tell me, in whose power am I? You ought to know that man?
    To-day, just before evening, as I was seeking to escape from
    myself and Maria, I wandered about the streets, but it was
    worse

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_202">202</a></span>

    there: everywhere I saw men
    and women, men and women. As if I had never seen them
    before! They all appeared naked to me. I stood long at
    Monte-Picio and tried to grasp what a sunset was but could
    not: before me there passed by in endless procession those
    men and women, gazing into each other’s eyes. Tell me—what
    is Woman? I saw one—very beautiful—in an automobile. The
    sunset threw a rosy glow upon her pale face and in her
    ears there glistened two diamond sparks. She gazed upon
    the sunset and the sunset gazed on her, but I could not
    endure it: sorrow and love gripped my heart, as if I were
    dying. There behind her were trees, green, almost black.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Maria! Maria!</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      April 19, Isle of Capri.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    Perfect calm reigned upon the sea. From a high precipice I
    gazed long upon a little schooner, motionless in the blue
    expanse. Its white sails were rigidly still and it seemed as
    happy as on that memorable day. And, again, great calm
    descended upon me, while the holy name of <em>Maria</em>
    resounded purely and peacefully, like the Sabbath bells on
    the distant shore.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    There I lay upon the grass, my face toward the sky. The good
    earth warmed my back, while my eyes were pierced with warm
    light, as if I had

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_203">203</a></span>

    thrust my face into the sun.
    Not more than three paces away there lay an abyss, a steep
    precipice, a dizzying wall, and it was delightful to
    imbibe the odor of grass and the Spring flowers of Capri.
    There was also the odor of Toppi, who was lying beside me:
    when he is heated by the sun he emits the smell of fur. He
    was all sunburned, just as if he had been smeared with
    coal. In general, he is a very amiable old Devil.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    The place where we lay is called Anacapri and constitutes the
    elevated part of the island. The sun had already set when we
    began our trip downward and a half moon had risen in the sky.
    But there was the same quiet and warmth and from somewhere
    came the strains of mandolins in love, calling to Maria.
    Maria everywhere! But my love breathed with great calm,
    bathed in the pure moonlight rays, like the little white
    houses below. In such a house, at one time, did Maria live,
    and into just such a house I will take her in about four
    days.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    A high wall along which the road ran, concealed the moon from
    us and here we beheld the statue of an old Madonna, standing
    in a niche, high above the road and the surrounding bushes.
    Before her burned with a weak flame the light of an
    image-lamp, and she seemed so alive in her watchful silence
    that my heart grew cold with sweet terror.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_204">204</a></span>

    Toppi bowed his head and
    mumbled a prayer, while I removed my hat and thought:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    How high above this earthly vessel, filled with moonlit
    twilight and mysterious charms, you stand. Thus does
    <em>Maria</em> stand above my soul....</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Enough! Here again the extraordinary begins and I must pause.
    We shall soon drink some champagne and then we shall go to
    the café. I understand they expect some mandolin players from
    Naples there to-day. Toppi would rather be shot than follow
    me: his conscience troubles him to this day. But it is good
    that I will be alone.</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      April 23—Rome,<br/>
      Palazzo Orsini.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    ...Night. My palace is dead and silent, as if it were one of
    the ruins of ancient Rome. Beyond the large window lies the
    garden: it is transparent and white with the rays of the moon
    and the vaporous pole of the fountain resembles a headless
    vision in a silver veil. Its splash is scarcely heard through
    the thick window-pane—as if it were the sleepy mumbling of
    the night guard.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yes, this is all beautiful and...how do you put it?—it
    breathes with love. Of course, it would be good to walk
    beside Maria over the blue

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_205">205</a></span>

    sand of the garden path and
    to trample upon her shadow. But I am disturbed and my
    disquiet is wider than love. In my attempts to walk
    lightly I wander about the room, lean against the wall,
    recline in silence in the corners, and all the time I seem
    to hear something. Something far away, a thousand
    kilometers from here. Or is this all lodged in my
    memory—that which I strain my ear to catch? And the
    thousand kilometers—are they the thousand years of my
    life?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    You would be astonished if you saw how I was dressed. My fine
    American costume had suddenly become unbearably heavy, so I
    put on my bathing suit. This made me appear thin, tall and
    wiry. I tried to test my nimbleness by crawling about the
    floor, suddenly changing the direction, like a noiseless bat.
    But it is not I who am restless. It is my muscles that are
    filled with this unrest, and I know not what they want. Then
    I began to feel cold. I dressed and sat down to write. I
    drank some wine and drew down the curtains to shut the white
    garden from my eyes. Then I examined and fixed my Browning. I
    intend to take it with me to-morrow for a friendly chat with
    Magnus.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    You see, Thomas Magnus has some <em>collaborators</em>. That
    is what he calls those gentlemen unknown to me who
    respectfully get out of my way

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_206">206</a></span>

    when we meet, but never greet
    me, as if we were meeting in the street and not in my
    house. There were two of them when I went to Capri. Now
    they are six, according to what Toppi tells me, and they
    live here. Toppi does not like them. Neither do I. They
    seem to have no <em>faces</em>. I could not see them. I
    happened to think of that just now when I tried to recall
    them.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “These are my assistants,” Magnus told me to-day without
    trying in the least to conceal his ridicule.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, I must say, Magnus, they have had bad training. They
    never greet me when we meet.“</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “On the contrary, dear Wondergood! They are very
    well-mannered. They simply cannot bring themselves to greet
    you without a proper introduction. They are...extremely
    correct people. However, you will learn all to-morrow. Don’t
    frown. Be patient, Wondergood! Just one more night!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “How is Signorina Maria’s health?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “<em>To-morrow</em> she will be well.” He placed his hand
    upon my shoulder and brought his dark, evil, brazen eyes
    closer to my face: “The passion of love, eh?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I shook off his hand and shouted:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Signor Magnus! I....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You?”—he frowned at me and calmly turned

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_207">207</a></span>

    his back upon me: “Till to-morrow, Mr. Wondergood!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    That is why I loaded my revolver. In the evening I was handed
    a letter from Magnus: he begged my pardon, said his conduct
    was due to unusual excitement and he sincerely sought my
    friendship and confidence. He also agreed that his
    <em>collaborators</em> are really ill-mannered folk. I gazed
    long upon these hasty illegible lines and felt like taking
    with me, not my revolver, but a cannon.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    One more night, but how long it is!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
<em>There is danger facing me.</em></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I feel it and my muscles <em>know</em> it, too. Do you think
    that I am merely afraid? I swear by eternal salvation—no! I
    know not where my fear has disappeared, but only a short
    while ago I was afraid of everything: of darkness, death and
    the most inconsequential pain. And now I fear nothing. I only
    feel strange...is that how you put it: strange?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Here I am on your earth, man, and I am thinking of another
    person who is dangerous to me and I myself am—man. And there
    is the moon and the fountain. And there is Maria, whom I
    love. And here is a glass and wine. And this is—my and your
    life. Or did I simply imagine that I was Satan once? I see
    <em>it</em> is all an invention, the fountain

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_208">208</a></span>

    and Maria and my very
    thoughts on the man—Magnus, but the <em>real</em> my mind
    can neither unravel nor understand. I assiduously examine
    my memory and it is silent, like a closed book, and I have
    no power to open this enchanted volume, concealing the
    whole past of my being. Straining my eyesight, I gaze into
    the bright and distant depth from which I came upon this
    pasteboard earth—but I see nothing in the painful ebb and
    flow of the boundless fog. There, behind the fog, is my
    country, but it seems—it seems I have quite forgotten the
    road.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I have again returned to Wondergood’s bad habit of getting
    drunk alone and I am slightly drunk now. No matter. It is the
    last time. I have just seen something after which I wish to
    see nothing else. I felt like taking a look at the white
    garden and to imagine how it would feel to walk beside Maria
    over the path of blue sand. I turned off the light in the
    room and opened wide the draperies. And the white garden
    arose before me, like a dream, and—think of it!—over the path
    of blue sand there walked a man and a woman—and the woman was
    Maria! They walked quietly, trampling upon their own shadows,
    and the man embraced her. The little counting machine in my
    breast beat madly, fell to the floor and broke, when,
    finally, I recognized the man—it was Magnus,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_209">209</a></span>

    only Magnus, dear Magnus,
    the father. May he be cursed with his fatherly embraces!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Ah, how my love for <em>Maria</em> surged up again within me!
    I fell on my knees before the window and stretched out my
    hands to her.... To be sure, I had already seen something of
    that kind in the theater, but it’s all the same to me: I
    stretched out my hands—was I not alone and drunk! Why should
    I not do what I want to do? Madonna! Then I suddenly drew
    down the curtain!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Quietly, like a web, like a handful of moonlight, I will take
    this vision and weave it into night dreams. Quietly!...
    Quietly!...

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_210">210</a></span></p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      May 25, 1914.—Italy.</p></div>
<p class="v1">
<span class="dropcap">H</span>ad I at my disposal, not the
    pitiful word but a strong
    orchestra, I would compel all the brass trumpets to roar. I
    would raise their blazing mouths to the sky and would compel
    them to rave incessantly in a blazen, screeching voice which
    would make one’s hair stand on end and scatter the clouds in
    terror. I do not want the lying violins. Hateful to me is the
    gentle murmur of false strings beneath the fingers of liars
    and scoundrels. Breath! Breath! My gullet is like a brass
    horn. My breath—a hurricane, driving forward into every
    narrow cleft. And all of me rings, kicks and grates like a
    heap of iron in the face of the wind. Oh, it is not always
    the mighty, wrathful roar of brass trumpets. Frequently, very
    frequently it is the pitiful wail of burned, rusty iron,
    crawling along lonely, like the winter, the whistle of bent
    twigs, which drives thought cold and fills the heart with the
    rust of gloom and homelessness. Everything that fire can
    touch has burned up within me. Was it I who wanted to

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_211">211</a></span>

    play? Was it I who yearned
    for the game? Then—look upon this monstrous ruin of the
    theater wrecked by the flames: all the actors, too, have
    lost their lives therein...ah, all the actors, too, have
    perished, and brazen Truth peers now through the beggarly
    holes of its empty windows.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    By my throne,—what was that love I prattled of when I donned
    this human form? To whom was it that I opened my embraces?
    Was it you...comrade? By my throne!—if I was Love but
    <em>for a single moment</em>, henceforth I am Hate and
    <em>eternally</em> thus I remain.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Let us halt at this point to-day, dear comrade. It has been
    quite some time since I moved my pen upon this paper and I
    must now grow accustomed anew to your dull and shallow face,
    smeared o’er with the red of your cheeks. I seem to have
    forgotten how to speak the language of respectable people who
    have just received a trouncing. Get thee hence, my friend.
    To-day I am a brass trumpet. Tickle not my throat, little
    worm. Leave me.</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      May 26, Italy.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    It was a month ago that Thomas Magnus <em>blew</em> me up.
    Yes, it is true. He really blew me up and it was a month ago,
    in the holy City of Rome, in the Palazzo Orsini, when I still
    belonged to the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_212">212</a></span>

    billionaire Henry
    Wondergood—do you remember that genial American, with his
    cigar and patent gold teeth? Alas! He is no longer with
    us. He died suddenly and you will do well if you order a
    requiem mass for him: his Illinois soul is in need of your
    prayers.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Let us return, however, to his last hours. I shall try to be
    exact in My recollections and give you not only the emotions
    but also the words of that evening—it was evening, when the
    moon was shining brightly. Perhaps I shall not give you quite
    the words spoken but, at any rate, they will be the words I
    heard and stored away in my memory.... If you were ever
    whipped, worthy comrade, then you know how difficult it was
    for you to count all the blows of the whip. A change of
    gravity! You understand? Oh, you understand everything. And
    so let us receive the last breath of Henry Wondergood, blown
    up by the culprit Thomas Magnus and buried
    by...<em>Maria</em>.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I remember: I awoke on the morning after that <em>stormy</em>
    evening, calm and even gay. Apparently it was the effect of
    the sun, shining into that same, broad window through which,
    at night, there streamed that unwelcome and too highly
    significant moonlight. You understand: now the moon and now
    the sun? Oh, you understand everything. It is probably for
    the very same reason

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_213">213</a></span>

    I acquired my touching
    faith in the integrity of Magnus and awaited toward
    evening that cloudless bliss. This expectation was all the
    greater because his collaborators...you remember his
    collaborators?—had begun to <em>greet</em> and
    <em>bow</em> to me. What is a greeting?—ah, how much it
    means to the faith of man!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    You know my good manners and, therefore, will believe me when
    I say that I was cold and restrained like a gentleman who has
    just received a legacy. But if you had put your ear to my
    belly you would have heard violins playing within. Something
    about love, you understand. Oh, you understand everything.
    And thus, with these violins did I come to Magnus in the
    evening when the moon was shining brightly. Magnus was alone.
    We were long silent and this indicated that an interesting
    conversation awaited me. Finally I said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “How is the Signorina’s health?”...</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But he interrupted me:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “We are facing a very difficult talk, Wondergood? Does that
    disturb you?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, no, not at all.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do you want wine? Well, never mind. I shall drink a little
    but you need not. Yes, Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He laughed as he poured out the wine and here

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_214">214</a></span>

    I noticed with astonishment
    that he himself was <em>very</em> excited: his large,
    white, hangman’s hands were quite noticeably trembling. I
    do not know exactly just when my violins ceased—I think it
    was at that very moment. Magnus gulped down two glasses of
    wine—he had intended to take only a little—and, sitting
    down, continued:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, you ought not to drink, Wondergood. I need all your
    <em>senses</em>, undimmed by anything...you didn’t drink
    anything to-day? No? That’s good. Your <em>senses</em> must
    be clear and sober. One must not take anesthetics in such
    cases as...as....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “As vivisection?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He shook his head seriously in affirmation.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, vivisection. You have caught my idea marvelously. Yes,
    in cases of vivisection of the soul. For instance, when a
    loving mother is informed of the death of her son or...a
    rich man that he has become penniless. But the senses, what
    can we do with the senses, we cannot hold them in leash all
    our life! You understand, Wondergood? In the long run, I am
    not in the least so cruel a man as I occasionally seem even
    to myself and the <em>pain</em> of others frequently arouses
    in me an unpleasant, responsive trembling. That is not good.
    A surgeon’s hand must be firm.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_215">215</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He looked at his fingers: they no longer trembled. He
    continued with a smile:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “However, wine helps some. Dear Wondergood, I swear by
    eternal salvation, by which you love so to swear, that it is
    extremely unpleasant for me to cause you this little...pain.
    Keep your senses, Wondergood! Your senses, your senses!
    Your hand, my friend?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I gave him my hand and Magnus enveloped my palm and fingers
    and held them long in his own paw, strained, permeated with
    some kind of electric currents. Then he let them go, sighing
    with relief.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “That’s it. Just so. Courage, Wondergood!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I shrugged my shoulders, lit a cigar and asked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Your illustration of the <em>very</em> wealthy man who has
    suddenly become a beggar,—does that concern me? Am I
    penniless?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus answered slowly as he gazed straight into my eyes:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “If you wish to put it that way—yes. You have nothing left.
    Absolutely nothing. And this palace, too, is already sold.
    To-morrow the new owners take possession.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, that is interesting. And where are my billions?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I have them. They are mine. I am a very wealthy man,
    Wondergood.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_216">216</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I moved my cigar to the other corner of my mouth and asked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And you are ready, of course, to give me a helping hand? You
    are a contemptible scoundrel, Thomas Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “If that’s what you call me—yes. Something on that order.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And a liar!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Perhaps. In general, dear Wondergood, it is very necessary
    for you to change your outlook on life and man. You are too
    much of an idealist.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And you”—I rose from my chair—“for you it is necessary to
    change your fellow conversationalist. Permit me to bid you
    good-by and to send a police commissary in my place.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus laughed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Nonsense, Wondergood! Everything has been done within the
    law. You, yourself, have handed over everything to me. This
    will surprise no one...with your love for humanity. Of
    course, you can proclaim yourself insane. You understand?—and
    then, perhaps, I may get to the penitentiary. But you—you
    will land in an insane asylum. You would hardly like that,
    dear friend. Police! Well, go on talking. It will relieve the
    first effects of the blow.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I think it was really difficult for me to conceal

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_217">217</a></span>

    my excitement. I hurled my
    cigar angrily into the fireplace, while my eye carefully
    measured both the window and Magnus...no, this carcass
    was too big to play ball with.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    At that moment the loss of my wealth had not yet fully
    impressed itself upon my mind and it was that which maddened
    me as much as the brazen tone of Magnus and the patronizing
    manner of the old scoundrel. In addition, I dimly sensed
    something portentous of evil and sorrow, like a threat: as if
    some real danger were lurking not in front of me but behind
    my back.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What is this all about?” I shouted, stamping my foot.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What is this all about?” replied Magnus, like an echo. “Yes,
    I really cannot understand why you are so excited,
    Wondergood. You have so frequently offered me this money and
    even forced it upon me and now, when the money is in my
    hands, you want to call the police! Of course,” Magnus
    smiled—“there is a slight distinction here: in placing your
    money so magnanimously at my <em>disposal</em>, you still
    remained its master and the master of the situation, while
    now...you understand, old friend: now I can simply drive
    you out of this house!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I looked at Magnus significantly. He replied

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_218">218</a></span>

    with no less a significant
    shrug of the shoulders and cried angrily:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Stop your nonsense. I am stronger than you are. Do not try
    to be more of a fool than is absolutely necessitated by the
    situation.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are an unusually brazen scoundrel, Signor Magnus!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Again! How these sentimental souls do seek consolation in
    words! Take a cigar and listen to me. I have long needed
    money, a great deal of money. In my past, which I need not
    disclose to you, I have suffered certain...failures. They
    irritated me considerably. Fools and sentimental souls, you
    understand? My energy was imprisoned under lock and key, like
    a bird in a cage. For three years I sat in this cursed cage,
    awaiting my chance....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And all that—in the beautiful Campagna?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, in the beautiful Campagna...and I had already begun
    to lose hope, when you appeared. I find it difficult to
    express myself at this point....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Be as direct as you can. Have no compunctions.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You seemed very strange with all this love of yours for men
    and your <em>play</em>, as you finally termed it, and, my
    friend, for a long time I had grave doubts as to what you
    really were: an extraordinary

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_219">219</a></span>

    fool or just a scoundrel,
    like myself. You see, such extraordinary asses appear so
    seldom that even I had my doubts. You are not angry?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, not at all.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You forced money upon me and I thought: a trap! However you
    made your moves quickly and certain precautions on my
    part....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Pardon me for interrupting. So, those books of yours, your
    solitary contemplation of life, that little white house and
    everything was all a lie? And murder—do you remember all that
    drivel about hands steeped in blood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, I did kill. That is true. And I have pondered much upon
    life, while awaiting you, but the rest, of course, was
    falsehood. Very base falsehood, but you were so
    credulous....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And...Maria?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I confess that I had hardly uttered this name when I felt
    something clutching at my throat. Magnus looked at me sharply
    and said gloomily:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “We will discuss Maria, too. But how excited you are! Even
    your nails have turned blue. Perhaps you’ll have some wine?
    Well, never mind. Have patience. I shall continue. When you
    began your affair with Maria...of course with my slight
    assistance...I finally concluded that you were....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “An extraordinary ass?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_220">220</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus raised his hand in a consoling gesture:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, no! You seemed to me to be that at the beginning. I will
    tell you quite truthfully, as I do everything I am telling
    you now: you are not a fool at all, Wondergood. I have grown
    to know you more intimately. It doesn’t matter that you have
    so naïvely surrendered your billions to me...many wise men
    have been fooled before by clever...scoundrels! Your
    misfortune is quite another thing.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I had the strength to smile:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “My love for human beings?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, my friend: your contempt for human beings! Your
    <em>contempt</em> and at the same time your naïve faith in
    them arising from it. You regard human beings so far below
    you, you are so convinced of their fatal powerlessness that
    you do not fear them at all and are quite ready to pat the
    rattlesnake’s head: such a nice little rattlesnake! One
    should fear people, comrade! I know your <em>game</em>, but
    at times you were quite sincere in your prattle about man,
    you even pitied him, but from an elevation or from a
    sidetrack—I know not which. Oh, if you could only hate people
    I would take you along with me with pleasure. But you are an
    egotist, a terrible egotist, Wondergood, and I am even
    beginning to shed my regrets for

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_221">221</a></span>

    having robbed you, when I
    think of that! Whence comes this base contempt of yours?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am still only learning to be a man.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well, go on learning. But why do you call your professor a
    scoundrel: For I am your professor, Wondergood!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “To the devil with this prattle. So...you do not intend to
    take me along with you?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, my friend, I do not.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “So. Only my billions. Very well, but what about your plan:
    to blow up the earth or something of that kind? Or did you
    lie on this point, too? I cannot believe that you simply
    intend to open...a money changer’s bureau or become some
    ragged king!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus looked at me gloomily. There was even a gleam of
    sympathy in his eyes as he replied slowly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, on that point I did not lie. But you won’t do for me.
    You would always be hanging on to my coat tails. Just now you
    shouted: liar, scoundrel, thief.... It’s strange, but you are
    yet only learning to be a man and you have already imbibed so
    much pettiness. When I shall raise my hand to strike some
    one, your contempt will begin to whine: don’t strike, leave
    him alone, have pity. Oh, if you could only hate! No, you are
    a terrible egotist, old man.”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_222">222</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I shouted:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “The devil take you with your harping on this egotism! I am
    not in the least more stupid than you, you beast, and I
    cannot understand what you find so saintly in hatred!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus frowned:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “First of all: don’t shout or I’ll throw you out. Do you
    hear? Yes, perhaps you are no more stupid than I am, but
    man’s business is not your business. Do you realize that, you
    beast? In blowing up things, I only intend to do business and
    you want to be the ruler of another’s plant. Let them steal
    and break down the machinery and you—you will be concerned
    only about your salary and the respect due you? And I—I won’t
    stand that! All this,”—he swept the room with a broad
    gesture—“is my plant, <em>mine</em>, do you hear, and it is
    I who will be robbed. I will be robbed and injured. And I
    hate those who rob me. What would you have done, in the long
    run, with your billions, if I had not taken them from you?
    Built conservatories and raised heirs—for the perpetuation of
    your kind? Private yachts and diamonds for your wife? And
    I...give me all the gold on earth and I will throw it all
    into the flames of my hatred. And all because I have been
    insulted! When you see a hunchback you throw him a lire. So
    that he may continue to bear his hump, yes?

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_223">223</a></span>

    And I want to destroy him, to
    kill him, to burn him like a crooked log. To whom do you
    appeal when you are fooled or when a dog bites your
    finger? To your wife, the police, public opinion? But
    suppose the wife, with the aid of your butler, plants
    horns on your head or public opinion fails to understand
    you and instead of pitying you prefers to give you a
    thrashing—then do you make your appeal to God? But I, I go
    to no one. I plead before no one, but neither do I
    forgive. You understand? I do not forgive! Only egotists
    forgive! I consider myself personally insulted!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I heard him in silence. Perhaps it was because I was so close
    to the fireplace, gazing into the fire and listening to
    Magnus’s words, each new word intermingled with a fresh blaze
    of a burning log; no sooner would the glowing red mass fall
    apart than the words, too, would break up into particles,
    like hot coals. My head was not at all clear and, under the
    influence of these burning, flaming, flying words I fell into
    a strange, dark drowsiness. But this was what my memory
    retained:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, if you could only hate! If you were not so cowardly and
    weak of soul! I would take you with me and would let you
    behold a fire which would forever dry your miserable tears
    and burn your sentimental dreams to ashes! Do you hear the
    song of the fools of the world? They are

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_224">224</a></span>

    merely loading the cannons.
    The wise man need only apply the fire to the fuse, you
    understand? Could you behold calmly the sight of a
    blissful sheep and hungry snake lying together, separated
    only by a thin partition? I could not! I would drill just
    a little opening, a little opening...the rest they would
    do themselves. Do you know that from the union of truth
    and falsehood comes an explosion? I want to unite. I shall
    do nothing myself: I shall only <em>complete</em> what
    they have begun. Do you hear how merrily they sing? I will
    make them dance, too! Come with me, comrade! You sought
    some sort of a play—let me give you an extraordinary
    spectacle! We shall bring the whole earth into action and
    millions of marionettes will begin to caper obediently at
    our command: you know not yet how talented and obliging
    they are. It will be a splendid play and will give you
    much pleasure and amusement....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    A large log fell apart and split into many sparks and hot
    cinders. The flame subsided, growing morose and red. A silent
    heat emanated from the dimmed, smoke-smeared hearth. It
    burned my face and suddenly there arose before me my puppets’
    show. The heat and fire had conjured up a mirage. I seemed to
    hear the crash of drums and the gay ring of cymbals, while
    the merry clown turned on his head at the sight of the
    broken

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_225">225</a></span>

    skulls of the dolls. The
    broken heads continued to pile up. Then I saw the scrap
    heap, with two motionless little legs protruding from the
    heap of rubbish. They wore rose slippers. And the drums
    continued beating: tump-tump-tump. And I said pensively:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I think it will hurt them.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And behind my back rang out the contemptuous and indifferent
    reply:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Quite possibly.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Tump-tump-tump....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It is all the same to you, Wondergood, but I cannot! Can’t
    you see: I cannot permit every miserable biped to call
    himself a man. There are too many of them, already. They
    multiply like rabbits, under the stimulus of physicians and
    laws. Death, deceived, cannot handle them all. It is confused
    and seems to have lost its dignity and moral authority. It is
    wasting its time in dancing halls. I hate them. It has become
    repulsive to me to walk upon this earth, fallen into the
    power of a strange, strange species. We must suspend the law,
    at least temporarily, and let death have its fling. However,
    they themselves will see to this. No, not I, but they, will
    do it. Think not that I am particularly cruel, no—I am only
    logical. I am only the conclusion, the symbol of equality,
    the sum total, the line beneath the

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_226">226</a></span>

    column of figures. You may
    call it Ergo, Magnus, Ergo! They say: ‘two and two’ and I
    reply: ‘four.’ Exactly four. Imagine that the world has
    suddenly grown cold and immovable for a moment and you
    behold some such picture: here is a free and careless head
    and above it—a suspended axe. Here is a mass of powder and
    here a spark about to fall upon it. But it has stopped and
    does not fall. Here is a heavy structure, set upon a
    single, undermined foundation. But everything has grown
    rigid and the foundation holds. Here is a breast and here
    a hand aiming a bullet at it. Have I prepared all this? I
    merely touch the lever and press it down. The axe falls
    upon the laughing head and crushes it. The spark falls
    into the powder—all is off! The building crashes to the
    ground. The bullet pierces the ready breast. And I—I have
    merely touched the lever, I, Magnus Ergo! Think: would I
    be able to kill had I at my disposal only violins or other
    musical instruments?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I laughed:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Only violins!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus replied with laughter: his voice was hoarse and heavy:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But they have other instruments, too! And I will use these
    instruments. See how simple and interesting all this is?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_227">227</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And what further, Magnus Ergo?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “How do I know what’s to follow? I see only <em>this</em>
    page and solve only <em>this</em> problem. I know not what
    the next page contains.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Perhaps it contains the same thing?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Perhaps it does. And perhaps this is the final page...well,
    what of that: the sum total remains as is necessary.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You spoke on one occasion about <em>miracles</em>?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, that is my lever. You remember what I told you
    <em>about my</em> explosive? I promise rabbits to make lions
    of them.... You see, a rabbit cannot stand brains. Give a
    rabbit brains and he will hang himself. Melancholy will drive
    him to suicide. Brains implies logic and what can
    <em>logic</em> promise to a rabbit? Nothing but a sorry fate
    on a restaurant menu. What one must promise a rabbit is
    either immortality for a cheap price, as does Cardinal X.
    or—heaven on earth. You will see what energy, what daring,
    etc., my rabbit will develop when I paint before him on the
    wall heavenly powers and gardens of Eden!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “On the wall?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes,—on a stone wall. He will storm it with all the power of
    his species! And who knows...who knows...perhaps this
    mass may really break through this stone wall?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus lapsed into thought. I drew away from

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_228">228</a></span>

    the now extinguished fire and
    looked upon the explosive head of my repulsive friend....
    Something naïve, like two little wrinkles, almost like
    those of a child, lay upon his stony brow. I burst into
    laughter and shouted:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Thomas Magnus! Thomas Ergo! Do you believe?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Without raising his head, as if he had not heard my laughter,
    he lifted his eyes and replied pensively:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “We must try.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
<em>But</em> I continued to laugh: deep, wild—apparently
    human—laughing malice began to rise within me:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Thomas Magnus! Magnus Rabbit! Do you believe?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He thumped the table with his fist and roared in a wild
    transport:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Be quiet! I tell you: we must try. How do I know? I have
    never yet been on Mars nor seen this earth inside-out. Be
    silent, accursed egotist! You know nothing of our affairs.
    Ah, if only you could hate!...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I hate already.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus suddenly laughed and grew strangely calm. He sat down
    and scrutinizing me from all possible angles, as if he did
    not believe me, he burst out:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_229">229</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You? Hate? Whom?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He looked me over as carefully again and shook his head in
    doubt:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Is that true, Wondergood?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “If they are rabbits, you are the most repulsive of them all,
    because you are a mixture of rabbit and...Satan. You are a
    coward! The fact that you are a crook, a thief, a liar, a
    murderer is not important. But you are a coward! That is
    important. I expected something more of you. I hoped your
    mind would lift you above the greatest crime, but you lift
    crime itself into some base philanthropy. You are as much of
    a lackey as the others. The only difference between you and
    them is that you have a perverted idea of service!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus sighed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “No, that’s not it. You understand nothing, Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And what you lack is daring, my friend. If you are Magnus
    Ergo...what audacity: Magnus Ergo!—then why don’t you go
    the limit? Then, I, too, would follow you...perhaps!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Will you really come?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And why should I not come? Let me be Contempt, and
    you—Hatred. We can go together. Do not fear lest I hang on to
    your coat tails. You

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_230">230</a></span>

    have revealed much to me, my
    dear putridity, and I shall not seize your hand even
    though you raise it against yourself.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Will you betray me?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And you will kill me. Is that not enough?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But Magnus shook his head doubtfully and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You will betray me. I am a living human being, while you
    smell like a corpse. I do not want to have contempt for
    <em>myself</em>. If I do, I perish. Don’t you dare to look
    at me! Look upon the others!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I laughed.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Very well. I shall not look at <em>you</em>. I will look at
    the rest. I will make it easier for you with my contempt.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus fell into prolonged thought. Then he looked again at
    me piercingly and quietly asked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And Maria?...”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Oh, cursed wretch! Again he hurled my heart upon the floor! I
    looked at him wildly, like one aroused at night by fire. And
    three big waves swept my breast. With the first wave rose the
    silent violins...ah, how they wailed, just as if the
    musician played not upon strings but upon my veins! Then in a
    huge wave with foamy surf there rolled by all the images,
    thoughts and emotions of my recent, beloved human state:
    think of it: everything was there! Even the lizzard
    that

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_231">231</a></span>

    hissed at my feet that
    evening beneath the moonlight. I recalled even the little
    lizzard! And with the third wave there was rolled out
    quietly upon the shore the holy name: <em>Maria</em>. And
    just as quietly it receded, leaving behind a delicate lace
    of foam, and from beyond the sea burst forth the rays of
    the sun, and for a moment, for one, little moment, I again
    became a white schooner, with sails lowered. Where were
    the stars while awaiting the word of the Lord of the
    universe to break forth in all their brilliance? Madonna!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus recalled me quietly.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Where are you going? She is not there. What do you want?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Pardon me, dear Magnus, but I would like to see the
    Signorina Maria. Only for a moment. I don’t feel quite well.
    There is something revolving in my eyes and head. Are you
    smiling, dear Magnus, or does it only seem so to me? I have
    been gazing into the fire too long and I can hardly discern
    the objects before me. Did you say: Maria? Yes, I would like
    to see her. Then we shall continue our interesting
    conversation. You will remind me just where we stopped, but
    meanwhile I would be extremely obliged to you, if we
    were...to take a little drive into the Campagna. It is so
    sweet there. And Signorina Maria....”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_232">232</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Sit down. You will see her presently.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But I continued to weave my nonsense—what in the devil had
    happened to my head! I prattled on for a considerable period
    and now the whole thing seems so ridiculous: Once or twice I
    pressed the heavy, motionless hand of Thomas Magnus:
    apparently he must have looked like my father at that moment.
    Finally, I subsided, partially regained my senses but, in
    obedience to Magnus’ command, remained in my chair and
    prepared to listen.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Can you listen now? You are quite excited, old man.
    Remember: the senses, the Senses!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, now I can go on. I...remember everything. Continue,
    old friend. I am all attention.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Yes, I recollected everything but it was quite immaterial to
    me just what Magnus said or what he might say: I was awaiting
    Maria. That is how strong my love was! Turning aside for some
    reason and beating time with his fingers on the table, Magnus
    said slowly and rather reluctantly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Listen, Wondergood. In reality, it would be much more
    convenient for me to throw you out into the street, you and
    your idiotic Toppi. You wanted to experience <em>all</em>
    human life and I would have viewed with pleasure any efforts
    on your part to earn your own bread. You are
    apparently

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_233">233</a></span>

    no longer used to this? It
    would also have been very interesting to know what would
    become of your grandiose contempt when.... But I am not
    angry. Strange to say, I even nurse a feeling of
    thankfulness for your...billions. And I am rather
    hopeful. Yes, I still have a little hope that some day you
    may really grow to be a man. And while this may prove an
    impediment to me, I am ready to take you with me, but
    only—after a certain test. Are you still anxious to
    have...Maria?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Very well.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus rose with effort and moved toward the door. But he
    halted for a moment and turned toward me and—surprising as it
    was on the part of this scoundrel—he kissed my brow.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Sit down, old man. I will call her immediately. The servants
    are all out to-day.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He uttered the last sentence as he knocked feebly at the
    door. The head of one of his <em>aides</em> appeared for a
    moment and immediately withdrew. With apparently the same
    effort Magnus returned to his place and said with a sigh:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “She will be here at once.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    We were silent. I fixed my eyes upon the tall door and it
    opened wide. <em>Maria</em> entered. With

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_234">234</a></span>

    a quick step I moved to greet
    her and bowed low. Magnus shouted:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Don’t kiss that hand!”</p>
<div class="v2">
<p class="right">
      May 27.</p></div>
<p class="v-indent">
    I could not continue these notes yesterday. Do not laugh!
    This mere combination of words: do not kiss that hand!—seemed
    to me the most terrible utterance the human tongue was
    capable of. It acted upon me like a magic curse. When I
    recall those words now they <em>interrupt</em> everything I
    do and befog my whole being, transporting me into a new
    state. If I happen to be speaking I grow silent, as if
    suddenly stricken dumb. If I happen to be walking, I halt. If
    standing, I run. If I happen to be asleep, no matter how deep
    my slumber, I awake and cannot fall asleep again. Very
    simple, extremely simple words: Do not kiss that hand!</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And now listen to what happened further:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And so: I bowed over <em>Maria’s</em> hand. But so strange
    and sudden was Magnus’ cry, so great was the command in his
    hoarse voice, that it was impossible to disobey. It was as if
    he had stopped a blind man on the edge of a precipice!
    <em>But</em> I failed to grasp his meaning and raised my head
    in perplexity, still holding Maria’s hand in mine, and looked
    at Magnus. He was breathing heavily,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_235">235</a></span>

    as if he had actually
    witnessed my fall into the abyss—and in reply to my
    questioning look, he said in a stifled tone:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Let her hand alone. Maria get away from him.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Maria released her hand and stepped aside, at a distance from
    me. Still perplexed I watched her, standing alone! I tried to
    grasp the situation. For a brief moment it seemed even
    extremely ludicrous and reminded me of a scene in a comedy,
    in which the angry father comes unexpectedly upon the
    sweethearts, but my silly laughter died away immediately and
    in obedient expectation I raised my eyes to Magnus.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus hesitated. Rising with an effort, he twice paced the
    length of the room and halting before me, with his hands
    clasped behind him, said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “With all your eccentricities, you’re a decent man,
    Wondergood. I have <em>robbed</em> you (that was how he put
    it) but I can no longer permit you to kiss the hand of this
    woman. Listen! Listen! I have already told you you must
    change your outlook upon men. I know it is very difficult and
    I sympathize with you, but it is essential that you do it,
    old friend. Listen! Listen! I misled you: Maria is not my
    daughter...I have no children. Neither is she a...Madonna.
    She is

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_236">236</a></span>

    my mistress and she was that
    as recently as last night....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Now I understand that Magnus was merciful in his own way and
    was intentionally submerging me slowly into darkness. But at
    that time I did not realize this and <em>slowly</em>
    stifling, my breath gradually dying, I lost consciousness.
    And when with Magnus’ last words the light fled from me and
    impenetrable night enveloped my being, I whipped out my
    revolver and fired at Magnus several times in succession. I
    do not know how many shots I fired. I remember only a series
    of laughing, flickering flames and the movements of my hand,
    pushing the weapon forward. I cannot remember at all how and
    when his <em>aides</em> rushed in and disarmed me. When I
    regained my senses this was the picture I saw: the
    <em>aides</em> were gone. I was sitting deep in my chair
    before the dark fireplace, my hair was wet, while above my
    left eyebrow there was a bandage soaked in blood. My collar
    was gone and my shirt was torn, my left sleeve was almost
    entirely torn off, so that I had to keep jerking it up
    constantly. Maria stood on the same spot, in the same pose,
    as if she had not moved at all during the struggle. I was
    surprised to see Toppi, who sat in a corner and gazed at me
    strangely. At the table, with his back to

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_237">237</a></span>

    me, stood Magnus. He was
    pouring out some wine for himself.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    When I heaved a particularly deep sigh, Magnus turned quickly
    and said in a strangely familiar tone:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do you want some wine, Wondergood? You may have a glass now.
    Here, drink.... You see you failed to hit me. I do not know
    whether to be glad or not, but I am alive. To your health,
    old man!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I touched my brow with my finger and mumbled:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Blood....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “A mere trifle, just a little scratch. It won’t matter. Don’t
    touch it.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It smells.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “With powder? Yes, that’ll soon pass, too. Toppi is here. Do
    you see him? He asked permission to stay here. You won’t
    object if your secretary remains while we continue our
    conversation? He is extremely devoted to you.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I looked at Toppi and smiled. Toppi made a grimace and sighed
    gently:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Mr. Wondergood! It is I, your Toppi.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And he burst into tears. This old devil, still emitting the
    odor of fur, this old clown in black, this sexton with
    hanging nose, this seducer of little girls—burst into tears!
    But still worse was it when, blinking my eyes, I, too, began
    to weep,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_238">238</a></span>

    I, “the wise, immortal,
    almighty!” Thus we both wept, two deceived devils who
    happened to drop in upon this earth, and human beings—I am
    happy to give them their due!—looked on with deep sympathy
    for our tears. Weeping and laughing at the same time, I
    asked:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “It’s difficult to be a man, Toppi?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And Toppi, sobbing, replied obediently:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Very difficult, Mr. Wondergood.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But here I happened to look at Maria and my sentimental tears
    immediately dried. In general, that evening is memorable for
    the sudden and ludicrous transformations of my moods. You
    probably know them, old man? Now I wept and beat the lyre,
    like a weeping post, now I became permeated with a stony calm
    and a sense of unconquerable power, or I began to chatter
    nonsense, like a parrot scared to death by a dog, and kept up
    my chatter, louder, sillier and more and more unbearable,
    until a new mood bore me off into a deep and inexpressible
    sadness. Magnus caught my look at Maria and smiled
    involuntarily. I adjusted the collar of my torn shirt and
    said <em>dryly</em> :</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I do not know whether to be glad or sorry that I failed to
    kill you, old friend. I am quite calm now, however, and would
    like you to tell me everything about...that woman. But as
    you are a

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_239">239</a></span>

    liar, let me question her
    first. Signorina Maria, you were my bride? And in a few
    days I hoped to call you my wife. But tell me the truth:
    are you really...this man’s mistress?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, signor.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And...how long?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Five years, signor.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And how old are you now.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Nineteen, signor.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “That means you were fourteen.... Now you may continue,
    Magnus.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, my God!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    (It was Toppi who exclaimed.)</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Sit down, Maria.—As you see, Wondergood,”—began Magnus in a
    dry and calm tone, as if he were demonstrating not himself
    but some sort of a chemical compound—“this mistress of mine
    is quite an extraordinary phenomenon. With all her unusual
    resemblance to the Madonna, capable of deceiving men better
    versed than you or I in religion, with all her really
    unearthly beauty, chastity and charm—she is a licentious and
    quite shameless creature, ready to sell herself from head to
    foot....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Magnus!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Calm yourself. You see how she listens to me? Even your old
    Toppi is cringing and blushing while she—her gaze is clear
    and all her features

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_240">240</a></span>

    are filled with placid
    harmony...did you notice how clear Maria’s gaze is? Do
    you hear me?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, certainly.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Would you like wine or an orange? Take it. There it is on
    the table. Incidentally, observe her graceful walk: she seems
    to be always stepping lightly as if on flowers or clouds.
    What extraordinary beauty and litheness! As an old lover of
    hers, I may also add the following detail which you have not
    learned yet: she herself, her body, has the fragrance of some
    flowers. Now as to her spiritual qualities, as the
    psychologists put it. If I were to speak of them in ordinary
    language, I would say she was as stupid as a goose,—quite a
    hopeless fool. But she is cunning. And a liar. Very
    avaricious as regards money but she likes it only in gold.
    Everything she told you she learned from me, memorizing the
    more difficult lines...and I had quite a task in teaching
    her. But I feared all the time that, despite your love, you
    would be struck by her apparent lack of brains and that is
    why I kept her from you the last few days.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi sobbed:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, God! Madonna!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Does this astonish you, Mr. Toppi?”—Magnus asked, turning
    his head. “I dare say you are

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_241">241</a></span>

    not alone. Do you remember,
    Wondergood, what I told you about Maria’s <em>fatal</em>
    resemblance, which drove one young man to suicide. I did
    not lie to you altogether: the youth actually did kill
    himself when he realized who Maria really was. He was pure
    of soul. He loved as you do and as you he could not
    bear—how do you put it?—the wreck of his ideal.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus laughed:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do you remember Giovanni, Maria?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Slightly.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do you hear, Wondergood?” asked Magnus, laughing. “That is
    exactly the tone in which she would have spoken of me a week
    hence if you had killed me to-day. Have another orange,
    Maria.... But if I were to speak of Maria in extraordinary
    language—she is not at all stupid. She simply doesn’t happen
    to have what is called a soul. I have frequently tried to
    look deep into her heart and thoughts and I have always ended
    in vertigo, as if I had been hurled to the edge of an abyss:
    there was <em>nothing</em> there. Emptiness. You have
    probably observed, Wondergood, or you, Mr. Toppi, that ice is
    not as cold as the brow of a <em>dead</em> man? And no matter
    what emptiness familiar to you you may imagine, my friends,
    it cannot be compared with that absolute vacuum which forms
    the kernel of my beautiful, light-giving star.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_242">242</a></span>

    Star of the Seas?—that was
    what you once called her, Wondergood, was it not?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus laughed again and gulped down a glass of wine. He
    drank a great deal that evening.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Will you have some wine, Mr. Toppi? No? Well, suit yourself.
    I’ll take some. So that is why, Mr. Wondergood, I did not
    want you to kiss the hand of that creature. Don’t turn your
    eyes away, old friend. Imagine you are in a museum and look
    straight at her, bravely. Did you wish to say something,
    Toppi?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, Signor Magnus. Pardon me, Mr. Wondergood, but I would
    like to ask your permission to leave. As a gentleman,
    although not much of that, I...cannot remain...at....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus narrowed his eyes derisively:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “At such a scene?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, at such a scene, when one gentleman, with the silent
    approval of another gentleman, insults a woman like
    <em>that</em>, ” exclaimed Toppi, extremely irritated, and
    rose. Magnus, just as ironically, turned to me:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And what do you say, Wondergood? Shall we release this
    little, extremely little, gentleman?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Stay, Toppi.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Toppi sat down obediently.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    From the moment Magnus resumed, I, for the first time,
    regained my breath and looked at Maria.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_243">243</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    What shall I say to you? It was <em>Maria</em>. And here I
    understood a little <em>what</em> happens in one’s brain when
    one begins to go mad.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “May I continue?” asked Magnus. “However, I have little to
    add. Yes, I took her when she was fourteen or fifteen years
    old. She herself does not know how old she really is, but I
    was not her first lover...nor the tenth. I could never
    learn her past exactly. She either lies cunningly or is
    actually devoid of memory. But even the most subtle
    questioning, which even a most expert criminal could not
    dodge, neither bribes nor gifts, nor threats—and she is
    extremely cowardly!—could compel her to reveal herself. She
    does not ‘remember.’ That’s all. But her deep licentiousness,
    enough to shame the Sultan himself, her extraordinary
    experience and daring in ars amandi confirms my suspicion
    that she received her training in a lupanaria or...or at
    the court of some Nero. I do not know how old she is and she
    seems to change constantly. Why should I not say that she is
    20 or 2000 years old? Maria...you can do everything and you
    know everything?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I did not look at that woman. But in her answer there was a
    slight displeasure:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Don’t talk nonsense. What will Mr. Wondergood think of me?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_244">244</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus broke into loud laughter and struck the table with
    his glass:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Do you hear, Wondergood? She covets your good opinion. And
    if I should command her to undress at once in your
    presence....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Oh, my God! My God!”—sobbed Toppi and covered his face with
    his hands. I glanced quickly into Magnus’ eyes—and remained
    rigid in the terrible enchantment of his gaze. His face was
    laughing. This pale mask of his was still lined with traces
    of faint laughter but the eyes were dim and inscrutable.
    Directed upon me, they stared off somewhere into the distance
    and were horrible in their expression of dark and
    <em>empty</em> madness: only the empty orbits of a skull
    could gaze so threateningly and in such wrath.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And again darkness filled my head and when I regained my
    senses Magnus had already turned and calmly sipped his wine.
    Without changing his position, he raised his glass to the
    light, smelled the wine, sipped some more of it and said as
    calmly as before:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And so, Wondergood, my friend. Now you know about all there
    is to know of Maria or the Madonna, as you called her, and I
    ask you: will you take her or not? I give her away. Take her.
    If you say yes, she will be in your bedroom to-day and...I
    swear by eternal salvation, you will

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_245">245</a></span>

    pass a very pleasant night. Well, what do you say?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yesterday, you, and to-day, I?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yesterday I,—to-day, you.” He smiled: “What kind of man are
    you, Wondergood, to speak of such trifles. Or aren’t you used
    to having some one else warm your bed? Take her. She is a
    fine girl.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Whom are you torturing, Magnus:—me or yourself?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus looked at me ironically:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What a wise boy! Of course, myself! You are a very clever
    American, Mr. Wondergood, and I wonder why your career has
    been so mediocre. Go to bed, dear children. Good night. What
    are you looking at, Wondergood: do you find the hour too
    early? If so, take her out for a walk in the garden. When you
    see Maria beneath the moonlight,
    3000 Magnuses will be unable to prove that this heavenly
    maiden is the same creature who....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I flared up:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are a disgusting scoundrel and liar, Thomas Magnus! If
    she has received her training in a lupanaria, then you, my
    worthy signor, must have received your higher education in
    the penitentiary. Whence comes that aroma which permeates so
    thoroughly your gentlemanly jokes

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_246">246</a></span>

    and witticisms. The sight of
    your pale face is beginning to nauseate me. After enticing
    a woman in the fashion of a petty, common hero....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus struck the table with his fist. His bloodshot eyes
    were aflame.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Silence! You are an inconceivable ass, Wondergood! Don’t you
    understand that I myself, like you, was deceived by her? Who,
    meeting <em>Madonna</em>, can escape deception? Oh devil!
    What are the sufferings of your little, shallow American soul
    in comparison with the pangs of mine? Oh devil! Witticism,
    jests, gentlemen and ladies, asses and tigers, gods and
    devils! Can’t you see: this is not a woman, this is—an eagle
    who daily plucks my liver! My suffering begins in the
    morning. Each morning, oblivious to what passed the day
    before, I see Madonna before me and believe. I think: what
    happened to me yesterday? Apparently, I must be mistaken or
    did I miss anything? It is impossible that this clear gaze,
    this divine walk, this pure countenance of Madonna should
    belong to a prostitute. It is your soul that is vile, Thomas
    Magnus: she is as pure as a host. And there were occasions
    when, on my knees, I actually begged forgiveness of this
    creature! Can you imagine it: on my knees! Then it was that I
    was really a scoundrel, Wondergood. I idealized her, endowed
    her with my thoughts and feelings

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_247">247</a></span>

    and was overjoyed, like an
    idiot. I almost wept with felicity when she mumblingly
    repeated what I would say. Like a high priest I painted my
    idol and then knelt before it in intoxication! But the
    truth proved stronger at last. With each moment, with each
    hour, falsehood slipped off her body, so that, toward
    night, I even beat her. I beat her and wept. I beat her
    cruelly as does a procurer his mistress. And then came
    night with its Babylonian licentiousness, the sleep of the
    dead and—oblivion. And then morning again. And again
    Madonna. And again...oh, devil! Over night my faith
    again grew, as did the liver of Prometheus, and like a
    bird of prey she tortured me all day. I, too, am human,
    Wondergood!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Shivering as if with cold, Magnus began to pace the room
    rapidly, gazed into the dark fireplace and approached Maria.
    Maria lifted her clear gaze to him, as if in question, while
    Magnus stroked her head carefully and gently, as he would
    that of a parrot or a cat:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What a little head! What a sweet, little head....
    Wondergood! Come, caress it!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I drew up my torn sleeve and asked ironically:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And it is this bird of prey that you now wish to give to me?
    Have you exhausted your feed? You want my liver, too, in
    addition to my billions?”

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_248">248</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But Magnus had already calmed himself. Subduing his
    excitement and the drunkenness which had imperceptibly come
    upon him, he returned to his place without haste and ordered
    politely:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I will answer you in a moment, Mr. Wondergood. Please
    withdraw to your room Maria. I have something to say to Mr.
    Wondergood. And I would ask you, too, my honorable Mr. Toppi,
    to depart. You may join my friends in the salon.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “If Mr. Wondergood will so command....” replied Toppi, dryly,
    without rising.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I nodded and, without looking at Magnus, my secretary
    obediently made his exit. Maria, too, left the room. To tell
    the truth, I again felt like clinging to his vest and weeping
    in the first few moments of my tête-à-tête with Magnus: after
    all, this thief was my friend! But I satisfied myself with
    merely swallowing my tears. Then followed a moment of brief
    desperation at the <em>departure</em> of Maria. And slowly,
    as if from the realm of remote recollection, blind and wild
    anger and the need of beating and destroying began to fill my
    heart. Let me add, too, that I was extremely provoked by my
    torn sleeve that kept slipping constantly: it was necessary
    for me to be stern and austere and this made me seem
    ridiculous...ah, on what trifles does the result of the
    greatest events depend on this earth! I lighted a cigar
    and

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_249">249</a></span>

    with studied gruffness hurled
    into the calm and hateful face of Magnus:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Now, you! Enough of comedy and charlatanism. Tell me what
    you want. So you want me to surrender to that bird of prey of
    yours?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus replied calmly, although his eyes were burning with
    anger:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes. That is the trial I wanted to subject you to,
    Wondergood. I fear that I have succumbed slightly to the
    emotion of useless and vain revenge and spoke more heatedly
    than was necessary in Maria’s presence. The thing is,
    Wondergood, that all that I have so picturesquely described
    to you, all this passion and despair and all these sufferings
    of...Prometheus really belong to the past. I now look upon
    Maria without pain and even with a certain amount of
    pleasure, as upon a beautiful and useful little
    beast...useful for domestic considerations. You understand?
    What after all, is the liver of Prometheus? It is all
    nonsense! In reality, I should be thankful to Maria. She
    gnawed out with her little teeth my silly <em>faith</em>
    and gave me that clear, firm and realistic outlook upon
    life which permits of no deceptions and...sentimentalisms.
    You, too, ought to experience and grasp it, Wondergood,
    if you would follow Magnus Ergo.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I remained silent, lazily chewing my cigar.

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_250">250</a></span>

    Magnus lowered his eyes and
    continued still more calmly and dryly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Desert pilgrims, to accustom themselves to death, used to
    sleep in coffins: let Maria be your coffin and when you feel
    like going to church, kissing a woman and stretching your
    hand to a friend, just look at Maria and her <em>father</em>,
    Thomas Magnus. Take her, Wondergood, and you will soon
    convince yourself of the value of my gift. I don’t need her
    any longer. And when your humiliated soul shall become
    inflamed with truly inextinguishable, human hatred and not
    with weak contempt, come to me and I shall welcome you into
    the ranks of my yeomanry, which will very soon.... Are you
    hesitating? Well, then go, catch other lies, but be careful
    to avoid scoundrels and Madonnas, my gentleman from
    Illinois!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He broke into loud laughter and swallowed a glass of wine at
    one gulp. His swollen calm evaporated. Little flames of
    intoxication, now merry, now ludicrous, like the lights of a
    carnival, now triumphant, now dim, like funeral torches at a
    grave, again sprang forth in his bloodshot eyes. The
    scoundrel was drunk but held himself firmly, merely swaying
    his branches, like an oak before a south wind. Rising and
    facing me, he straightened his body cynically, as if trying
    to reveal himself in his entirety, and well nigh spat these
    words at me:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_251">251</a></span></p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Well? How long do you intend to think about it, you ass?
    Come, quick, or I’ll kick you out! Quick! I’m tired of you!
    What’s the use of my wasting words? What are you thinking
    of?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    My head buzzed. Madly pulling up that accursed sleeve of
    mine, I replied:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am thinking that you are an evil, contemptible, stupid and
    repulsive beast! I am thinking in what springs of life or
    hell itself I could find for you the punishment you deserve!
    Yes, I came upon this earth to play and to laugh. Yes, I
    myself was ready to embrace any evil. I myself lied and
    pretended, but you, hairy worm, you crawled into my very
    heart and bit me. You took advantage of the fact that my
    heart was human and bit me, you hairy worm. How dared you
    deceive me? I will punish you.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You? Me?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am glad to say that Magnus was astonished and taken aback.
    His eyes widened and grew round and his open mouth naïvely
    displayed a set of white teeth. Breathing with difficulty, he
    repeated:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You? Me?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes. I—you.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Police?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “You are not afraid of it? Very well. Let all your courts be
    powerless, remain unpunished on

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_252">252</a></span>

    this earth, you evil
    conscienceless creature! The day will come when the sea of
    falsehood, which constitutes your life, will part and all
    your falsehood, too, will give way and disappear. Let
    there be no foot upon this earth to crush you, hairy worm.
    Let! I, too, am powerless here. But the day will come when
    you will depart from this earth. And when you come to
    <em>Me</em> and fall under the shadow of my kingdom....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Your kingdom? Hold on, Wondergood. Who are you, then?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And right at this point there occurred the most shameful
    event of my entire earthly life. Tell me: is it not
    ridiculously funny when Satan, even in human form, bends his
    knee in prayer to a prostitute and is stripped naked by the
    very first man he meets? Yes, this is extremely ridiculous
    and shameful of Satan, who bears with him the breath of
    eternity. But what would you say of Satan when he turned into
    a powerless and pitiful liar and pasted upon his head with a
    great flourish the paper crown of a theatrical czar? I am
    ashamed, old man. Give me one of your blows, the kind on
    which you feed your friends and hired clowns. Or has this
    torn sleeve brought me to this senseless, pitiful wrath? Or
    was this the last act of my human masquerade, when man’s
    spirit descends to the mire and sweeps the dust and dirt with
    its

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_253">253</a></span>

    breath? Or has the
    <em>ruin</em> of Madonna, which I witnessed, dragged
    Satan, too, into the same abyss?</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    But this was—think of it!—this was what I answered Magnus.
    Thrusting out my chest, barely covered with my torn shirt,
    stealthily pulling up my sleeve, so that it might not slip
    off entirely, and looking sternly and angrily directly into
    the stupid, and as they seemed to me, frightened eyes of the
    scoundrel Magnus, I replied <em>triumphantly</em>:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I am—Satan!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus was silent for a moment—and then broke out into all
    the laughter that a drunken, repulsive, human belly can
    contain. Of course you, old man, expected that, but I did
    not. I swear by eternal salvation, I did not! I shouted
    something but the brazen laughter of this beast drowned my
    voice. Finally, taking advantage of a moment’s interval
    between his thundering peals of laughter, I exclaimed quickly
    and modestly...like a footnote at the bottom of a page,
    like a commentary of a publisher:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Don’t you understand: I am Satan. I have donned the human
    form! I have donned the human form!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He heard me with his eyes bulging, and with fresh thunderous
    roars of laughter, the outbursts

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_254">254</a></span>

    shaking his entire frame, he
    moved toward the door, flung it open and shouted:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Here! Come here! Here is Satan! In human...human garb!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And he disappeared behind the door.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Oh, if I could only have fallen through the floor,
    disappeared or flown away, like a real devil, on wings, in
    that endless moment, during which he was gathering the
    <em>public</em> for an extraordinary spectacle. And now they
    came—all of them, damn them: Maria and all the six
    <em>aides</em> and my miserable Toppi, and Magnus himself,
    and completing the procession—His Eminence, Cardinal X.! The
    cursed, shaven monkey walked with great dignity and even
    bowed to me, after which he sat down, just as dignified, in
    an armchair and carefully covered his knees with his robes.
    All were wondering, not knowing yet what it was all about,
    and glanced now at me and now at Magnus, who tried hard to
    look serious.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “What’s the trouble, Signor Magnus?” asked the Cardinal in a
    benevolent tone.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Permit me to report the following, your Eminence: Mr. Henry
    Wondergood has just informed me that he is—Satan. Yes, Satan,
    and that he has merely donned the human form. And thus our
    assumption that he is an American from Illinois falls. Mr.
    Wondergood is Satan and apparently

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_255">255</a></span>

    has but recently deigned to
    arrive from Hell. What shall we do about it, Your
    Eminence?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Silence might have saved me. But how could I restrain this
    maddened Wondergood, whose heart was aflame with insult! Like
    a lackey who has appropriated his celebrated master’s name
    and who faintly senses something of his grandeur, power and
    connections—Wondergood stepped forward and said with an
    ironic bow:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Yes, I am Satan. But I must add to the speech of Signor
    Magnus that not only do I wear the human form but also that I
    have been robbed. Are those <em>two</em> scoundrels who have
    robbed me known to you, Your Eminence? And are you, perhaps,
    one of them, Your Eminence?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Magnus alone continued to smile. The rest, it seemed to me,
    grew serious and awaited the Cardinal’s reply. It followed.
    The shaven monkey, it developed, was not a bad actor.
    Pretending to be startled, the Cardinal raised his right hand
    and said with an expression of extreme goodness, contrasting
    sharply with his words and gesture:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Vade Petro Satanas!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am not going to describe to you how they laughed. You can
    imagine it. Even Maria’s teeth parted slightly. Almost losing
    consciousness from anger and impotence, I turned to Toppi for
    sympathy and aid. But Toppi, covering his face
    with

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_256">256</a></span>

    his hands, was cringing in
    the corner, silent. Amid general laughter, and ringing far
    above it, came the heavy voice of Magnus, laden with
    infinite ridicule:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Look at the plucked rooster. That is Satan!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And again there came an outburst of laughter. His Eminence
    continuously shook, as though flapping his wings, and choked
    and whined. The monkey’s gullet could hardly pass the
    cascades of laughter. I tore off that accursed sleeve madly
    and waving it like a flag, I ventured into a sea of
    falsehood, with full sails set. I knew that somewhere ahead
    there were rocks against which I might be shattered but the
    tempest of impotence and anger bore me on like a chip of
    wood.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I am ashamed to repeat my speech here. Every word of it was
    trembling and wailing with impotency. Like a village vicar,
    frightening his ignorant parishioners, I threatened them with
    <em>Hell</em> and with all the Dantean tortures of literary
    fame. Oh, I did know something that I might really have
    frightened them with but how could I express the
    <em>extraordinary</em> which is inexpressible in their
    language? And so I prattled on of eternal fire. Of eternal
    torture. Of unquenchable thirst. Of the gnashing of teeth. Of
    the fruitlessness of tears and pleading. And what else? Ah,
    even of red hot forks I prattled, maddened more and more
    by

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_257">257</a></span>

    the indifference and
    shamelessness of these shallow faces, these small eyes,
    these mediocre souls, regarding themselves above
    punishment. But they remained unmoved and smug, as if in a
    fortress, beyond the walls of their mediocrity and fatal
    blindness. And all my words were shattered against their
    impenetrable skulls! And think of it, the only one who was
    really frightened was my Toppi! And yet he alone could
    <em>know</em> that all my words were lies! It was so
    unbearably ridiculous when I met his pleading frightened
    eyes, that I abruptly ended my speech, suddenly, at its
    very climax. Silently, I waved my torn sleeve, which
    served me as a standard, once or twice, and hurled it into
    the corner. For a moment it seemed to me that the shaven
    monkey, too, was frightened: the blue of his cheeks seemed
    to stand out sharply upon the pale, square face and the
    little coals of his eyes were glowing suspiciously beneath
    his black, bushy eyebrows. But he slowly raised his hand
    and the same sacrilegiously-jesting voice broke the
    general silence:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Vade Petro Satanas!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Or did the Cardinal try to hide behind this jest his actual
    fright? I do not know. I know nothing. If I could not destroy
    them, like Sodom and Gomorrah, is it worth while speaking of
    cold shivers

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_258">258</a></span>

    and goose flesh? A mere glass of wine can conquer them.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    And Magnus, like the skilled healer of souls that he was,
    said calmly:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Will you have a glass of wine, Your Eminence?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “With pleasure,” replied the Cardinal.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “But none for Satan,” added Magnus jestingly, pouring out the
    wine. But he could speak and do anything he pleased now:
    Wondergood was squeezed dry and hung like a rag upon the arm
    of the chair.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    After the wine had been drunk, Magnus lit a cigarette (he
    smokes cigarettes), cast his eye over the audience, like a
    lecturer before a lecture, motioned pleasantly to Toppi, now
    grown quite pale, and said the following...although he was
    obviously drunk and his eyes were bloodshot, his voice was
    firm and his speech flowed with measured calm:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I must say, Wondergood, that I listened to you very
    attentively and your passionate tirade created upon me, I may
    say, a great, artistic impression...at certain points you
    reminded me of the best passages of Brother Geronimo
    Savanarola. Don’t you also find the same striking
    resemblance, Your Eminence? But alas! You are slightly behind
    the times. Those threats of hell

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_259">259</a></span>

    and eternal torture with
    which you might have driven the beautiful and merry
    Florence to panic ring extremely unconvincing in the
    atmosphere of contemporary Rome. The sinners have long
    since departed from the earth, Mr. Wondergood. Have not
    you noticed that? And as for criminals, and, as you have
    expressed it, scoundrels,—a plain commissary of police is
    much more alarming to them than Beelzebub himself with his
    whole staff of devils. I must also confess that your
    reference to the court of history and posterity was rather
    strange when contrasted with the picture you painted of
    the tortures of hell and your reference to eternity. But
    here, too, you failed to rise to the height of
    contemporary thought: every fool nowadays knows that
    history records with equal impartiality both the names of
    saints and of rogues. The whole point, Mr. Wondergood,
    which you, as an American, should be particularly familiar
    with, is in the scope with which history treats its
    respective subjects and heroes. The lashings history
    administers to its great criminals differ but little from
    her laurels—when viewed at a distance and this little
    distinction eventually becomes quite invisible—I assure
    you, Wondergood. In fact, it disappears entirely! And in
    so far as the biped strives to find a place in history—and
    we are all animated by this desire, Mr.
    Wondergood—it

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_260">260</a></span>

    need not be particular
    through which door it enters: I beg the indulgence of His
    Eminence, but no prostitute received a new guest with
    greater welcome than does history a new...hero. I fear,
    Wondergood, that your references to hell as well as those
    to history have fallen flat. Ah, I fear your hope in the
    police will prove equally ill-founded: I have failed to
    tell you that His Eminence has received a certain share of
    those billions which you have transferred to me in such a
    perfectly legal manner, while his connections...you
    understand?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Poor Toppi: all he could do was to keep on blinking! The
    <em>aides</em> broke into loud laughter, but the Cardinal
    mumbled angrily, casting upon me the burning little coals of
    his eyes:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “He is indeed a brazen fellow. He said he is Satan. Throw him
    out, Signor Magnus. This is sacrilege!”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Is that so?” smiled Magnus politely: “I did not know that
    Satan, too, belonged to the heavenly chair....”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Satan is a fallen angel,” said the Cardinal in an
    instructive tone.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “And as such he is in your service? I understand,” Magnus
    bowed his head politely in acceptance of this truth and
    turned smilingly to me:

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_261">261</a></span>

    “Do you hear, Wondergood? His
    Eminence is irritated by your audacity.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I was silent. Magnus winked at me slyly and continued with an
    air of artificial importance:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “I believe, Your Eminence, that there must be some sort of
    misunderstanding here. I know the modesty and well-informed
    mind of Mr. Wondergood and I suppose that he utilized the
    name of Satan merely as an artistic gesture. Does Satan ever
    threaten people with the police? But my unfortunate friend
    did. And, in general, has anybody ever seen <em>such</em> a
    Satan?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He stretched his hand out to me in an effective gesture—and
    the reply to this was another outburst of laughter. The
    Cardinal, too, laughed, and Toppi alone shook his wise head,
    as if to say:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Idiots!”...</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    I think Magnus must have noticed that. Or else he fell into
    intoxication. Or was it because that spirit of murder with
    which his soul was aflame could not remain passive and was
    tearing at the leash. He threateningly shook his heavy,
    explosive head and shouted:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “Enough of this laughter! It is silly. Why are you so sure of
    yourselves? It is stupid, I tell you. I believe in nothing
    and that is why I admit <em>everything</em>. Press my hand,
    Wondergood: they are all fools and I am quite ready to admit
    that

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_262">262</a></span>

    you are Satan. Only you have
    fallen into a bad mess, friend Satan. Because it will not
    save you. I will soon throw you out anyhow! Do you
    hear...devil?”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    He shook his finger at me threateningly and then lapsed into
    thought, dropping his head low and heavily, with his red eyes
    ablaze, like those of a bull, ready to hurl himself upon his
    enemy. The <em>aides</em> and the insulted Cardinal were
    silent with confusion. Magnus again shook his finger at me
    significantly and said:</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    “If you are Satan, then you’ve come here too late. Do you
    understand? What did you come here for, anyway? To play, you
    say? To tempt? To laugh at us human beings? To invent some
    sort of a new, evil game? To make us dance to your tune?
    Well,—you’re too late. You should have come earlier, for the
    earth is grown now and no longer needs your talents. I speak
    not of myself, who deceived you so easily and took away your
    money: I, Thomas Ergo. I speak not of Maria. But look at
    these modest little friends of mine: where in your hell will
    you find such charming, fearless devils, ready for any task?
    And yet they are so small,—they will not even find a place in
    history.”</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    It was after this that Thomas Magnus blew me up, in the holy
    city of Rome, in the Palazzo Orsini,

<span class="pagenum">
<a id="Page_263">263</a></span>

    when I still belonged to the
    American billionaire, Henry Wondergood. Do you remember
    that genial American with his cigar and patent gold teeth?
    Alas! He is no longer with us. He died suddenly and you
    will do well if you order a requiem mass for him: his
    Illinois soul is in need of your prayers.</p>
<p class="v-indent">
    Let us receive the last breath of Henry Wondergood, blown up
    by the culprit Thomas Magnus, and buried by Maria in the
    evening, when the moon was shining brightly.</p>
