<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>April 8: Rome</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary-entry">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">April 8: Rome</h2>
				<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">April 8, Rome.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Before knocking at my door, His Majesty, the ex-King <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> had knocked at no small number of entrances in Europe. True to the example of his apostolic ancestors, who believed in the gold of Israel, he particularly liked to approach Jewish bankers; I believe that the honor done me by his visit was based upon his firm conviction that I was a Jew. Although His Majesty was visiting Rome incognito, I, warned of his visit, met him at the foot of the stairs and bowed low to him⁠—I think that is the requirement of etiquette. Then, also in accordance with etiquette, we introduced ourselves, he⁠—his adjutant, I⁠—Thomas Magnus.</p>
			<p>I confess I had not a very flattering opinion of the former king and that is why he astonished me all the more with his high opinion of himself. He gave me his hand politely but with such haughty indifference, he looked at me with such complete self-confidence, as if he were gazing at a being of a lower order, he walked ahead of me so naturally, sat down without invitation, gazed upon the walls and furniture in such frankly royal manner, that my entire uneasiness due to my unfamiliarity with etiquette disappeared immediately. It was only necessary to follow this fellow, who appeared to know everything so well. In appearance he was quite a young man, with fresh complexion and magnificent coiffure, somewhat worn out but sufficiently well-preserved, with colorless eyes and a calm, brazenly protruding lower lip. His hands were beautiful. He did not try to conceal that he was bored by my American face, which appeared Jewish to him, and by the necessity of asking me for money: he yawned slightly after seating himself and said:</p>
			<p>“Sit down, gentlemen.”</p>
			<p>And with a slight command of the hand he ordered the adjutant to state the nature of his proposal. He paid no attention to Magnus at all, and while the fat, red and obliging adjutant was stealthily narrating the story of the “misunderstanding” which caused the departure of His Majesty from his country⁠—His Majesty was nonchalantly examining his feet. Finally, he interrupted his representative’s speech with the impatient remark:</p>
			<p>“Briefer, Marquis. <abbr>Mr.</abbr>. … Wondergood is as well familiar with this history as we are. In a word, these fools kicked me out. How do you regard it, dear Wondergood?”</p>
			<p>“How do I regard it?” I bowed low:</p>
			<p>“I am glad to be of service to Your Majesty.”</p>
			<p>“Well, yes, that’s what they all say. But will you give me any money? Continue, Marquis.”</p>
			<p>The Marquis, smiling gently at me and Magnus (despite his obesity he looked quite hungry) continued to weave his thin flimsy web about the misunderstanding, until the bored king again interrupted him:</p>
			<p>“You understand: these fools thought that I was responsible for all their misfortunes. Wasn’t that silly, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood? And now they are worse off than ever and they write: ‘Come back, for God’s sake. We are perishing!’ Read the letters, Marquis.”</p>
			<p>At first the king spoke with a trace of excitement but apparently any effort soon wearied him. The Marquis obediently took a packet of papers from the portfolio and tortured us with the complaints of the orphaned subjects, begging their lord to return. I looked at the king: he was no less bored than we were. It was so clear to him that the people could not exist without him that all confirmations of this seemed superfluous. … And I felt so strange: whence does this miserable man get so much happy confidence? There was no doubt that this bird, unable to find a crumb for himself, sincerely believed in the peculiar qualities of his personage, capable of bestowing upon a whole people marvelous benefactions. Stupidity? Training? Habit? At that moment the marquis was reading the plea of some correspondent, in which, through the web of official mediocrity and the lies of swollen phrases, gleamed the very same confidence and sincere call. Was that, too, stupidity and habit?</p>
			<p>“And so forth, and so forth,” interrupted the king listlessly: “that will do, Marquis, you may close your portfolio. Well, what you think of it, dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”</p>
			<p>“I will be bold enough to say to Your Majesty that I am a representative of an old, democratic republic and. …”</p>
			<p>“Stop, Wondergood! Republic, democracy! That’s nonsense. You know well enough yourself that a king is a necessity. You, in America, will have a king, too, some day. How can you get along without a king: who will be responsible for them before God? No, that’s foolish.”</p>
			<p>This creature was actually getting ready to answer for the people before God! And he continued with the same calm audacity:</p>
			<p>“The king can do everything. And what can a president do? Nothing. Do you understand, Wondergood⁠—<em>Nothing!</em> Why, then, do you want a president who can do nothing?”⁠—he deigned to twist his lower lip into a sarcastic smile.⁠—“It is all nonsense, invented by the newspapers. Would you, for example, take your president seriously, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”</p>
			<p>“But representative government. …”</p>
			<p>“Fi! Excuse me, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood (he recalled my name with great difficulty) but what fool will pay any attention to the representatives of the people? Citizen <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">A</i> will pay heed to Citizen <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">B</i> and Citizen <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">B</i> will pay heed to Citizen <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">A</i>⁠—is that not so? But who will compel their obedience if both of them are wise? No, I, too, have studied logic, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood and you will permit me to indulge in a laugh!”</p>
			<p>He laughed slightly and said with his usual gesture:</p>
			<p>“Continue, Marquis. … No, let me do it. The King can do <em>everything</em>, Wondergood, you understand?”</p>
			<p>“But the law. …”</p>
			<p>“Ah, this fellow, too, speaks of law. Do you hear, Marquis? No, I really can’t understand what you want this law for! That all may suffer equitably! However, if you are so keen on having law, law you shall have. But who will give it to you, if not I?”</p>
			<p>“But the representatives of the people. …”</p>
			<p>The king directed his colorless eyes upon me, almost in despair:</p>
			<p>“Ah, again citizen <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">A</i> and <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">B</i>! But can’t you understand, dear Wondergood? What kind of a law is it if they themselves make it? What wise man will agree to obey it? No, that’s nonsense. Is it possible that you yourself obey this law, Wondergood?”</p>
			<p>“Not only I, Your Majesty, but the whole of America. …”</p>
			<p>His eyes measured me with sympathy.</p>
			<p>“Pardon me, but I don’t believe it. The whole of America! Well, in that case they simply don’t understand what law is⁠—do you hear, Marquis, the whole of America! But that’s not the thing. I must return, Wondergood. You’ve heard what the poor devils write?”</p>
			<p>“I am happy to see that the road is open for you, my lord.”</p>
			<p>“Open? You think so? Hm! No, I need money. Some write and others don’t, you understand?”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps they don’t know how to write, my lord?”</p>
			<p>“They? Oh! You should have seen what they wrote against me. I was quite flustered. What they need is the firing squad.”</p>
			<p>“All of them?”</p>
			<p>“Why all of them? Some of them will be enough. The rest of them will simply be scared to death. You understand, Wondergood, they have simply stolen my power from me and now, of course, will simply refuse to return it. You can’t expect me to see to it that no one robs me. And these gentlemen,”⁠—he indicated the blushing Marquis⁠—“to my sorrow did not manage to guard my interests.”</p>
			<p>The Marquis mumbled confusedly:</p>
			<p>“Sire!”</p>
			<p>“Now, now, I know your devotion, but you were asleep at the switch just the same? And now there is so much trouble, so much trouble!”⁠—he sighed lightly. “Did not Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr> tell you I needed money, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood? He promised to. Of course I will return it all and … however, you should take this matter up with the Marquis. I have heard that you love people very much, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”</p>
			<p>A faint smile flitted over the dim face of Magnus. I bowed slightly.</p>
			<p>“The Cardinal told me so. That is very praiseworthy, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. But if you do love people you will certainly give me money. I don’t doubt that in the least. They must have a king. The newspapers are merely prattling nonsense. Why do they have a king in Germany, a king in England, a king in Italy, and a hundred other kings? And don’t we need a king too?”</p>
			<p>The adjutant mumbled:</p>
			<p>“A misunderstanding. …”</p>
			<p>“Of course a misunderstanding. The Marquis is quite right. The newspapers call it a revolution, but believe me, I know my people; it is simply a misunderstanding. They are now weeping themselves. How can they get along without a king? There would be no kings at all then. You understand? What nonsense! They now talk of no God, too. No, we must do a little shooting, a little shooting!”</p>
			<p>He rose quickly and this time shook my hand with a patronizing smile and bowed to Magnus.</p>
			<p>“Goodbye, goodbye, my dear Wondergood. You have a magnificent figure. … Oh, what a splendid fellow! The Marquis will drop in to see you one of these days. There was something more I wanted to say. Oh, yes: I hope that you in America will have a king, too, in the near future … that is very essential, my friend. Moreover, that’s bound to be the end! Au revoir!”</p>
			<p>We escorted His Majesty with the same ceremony. The Marquis followed and his bowed head, divided into two halves by the part in his reddish hair, and his red face bore the expression of hunger and constant failure. … Ah, he has so frequently and so fruitlessly orated about that ‘misunderstanding’! The King, apparently, also recalled at that moment his vain knocking about at other thresholds: his bloodless face again filled with grayish ennui and in reply to my parting bow, he opened wide his eyes, as if in astonishment, with the expression: what more does this fool want? Ah, yes, he has money. And lazily he asked:</p>
			<p>“And so, you’ll not forget, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> … friend!” And his automobile was magnificent and just as magnificent was the huge chauffeur, resembling a gendarme, attired for the new role. When we had reascended the stairs (our respectful lackeys meanwhile gazing upon me as on a royal personage) and entered our apartments, Magnus fell into a long, ironic silence. I asked:</p>
			<p>“How old is this creature?”</p>
			<p>“Didn’t you know, Wondergood? That’s bad. He is 32 years old. Perhaps less.”</p>
			<p>“Did the Cardinal really speak of him and ask you to give him money?”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—from what you may have left after the Cardinal’s wants are attended to.”</p>
			<p>“That is probably due to the fact that the monarchist form of government is also in vogue in heaven. Can you conceive of a republic of saints and the administration of the world on the basis of popular representation? Think of it: even devils will then receive the vote. A King is most necessary, Wondergood. Believe me.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense! This is not worthy even of a jest.”</p>
			<p>“I am not jesting. You are mistaken. And pardon me for being so direct, my friend: in his discussion about kings <em>he</em> was above you, this time. You saw only a creature, a countenance of purely material limitations and ridiculous. <em>He</em> conceived himself to be a symbol. That is why he is so calm and there is no doubt that he will return to his beloved people.”</p>
			<p>“And will do a little shooting.”</p>
			<p>“And will do a little shooting. And will throw a little scare into them. Ah, Wondergood, how stubborn you are in your refusal to part with the multiplication table! Your republic is a simple table, while a king⁠—do you realize it?⁠—is a <em>miracle</em>! What can there be simpler, sillier and more hopeless than a million bearded men, governing themselves⁠—and how wonderful, how miraculous when this million of bearded fellows are governed by a creature! That is a miracle! And what possibilities it gives rise to! It seemed very funny to me when you spoke with so much warmth about the law, this dream of the devil. A king is necessary for the precise purpose of <em>breaking</em> the law, in order that the <em>will</em> may be <em>above</em> the law!”</p>
			<p>“But laws change, Magnus.”</p>
			<p>“To change is only to submit to necessity and to new law, which was unknown to you before. Only by breaking the law do you elevate the <em>will</em>. Prove to me that God himself is subject to his own laws, <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr>, to put it simply, that he cannot perform miracles, and tomorrow your shaven monkey will share the fate of loneliness and all the churches will be turned into horse stables. The miracle, Wondergood, the miracle⁠—that is what holds human beings on this cursed earth!”</p>
			<p>Magnus emphasized these words by banging the table with his fist. His face was gloomy. In his dark eyes there flickered unusual excitement. Speaking as if he were threatening someone, he continued:</p>
			<p>“<em>He</em> believes in miracles and I envy him. He is insignificant, he is really what you might call a creature, but he believes in miracles. And he has already been a king and will be a king again! And we! …”</p>
			<p>He waved his hand contemptuously and began to pace the carpet like an angry captain on the deck of <em>his</em> vessel. With much respect I gazed upon his heavy, explosive head and blazing eyes: for the first time I realized what <em>Satanic</em> ambitions there were concealed in this strange gentlemen. “And we!” Magnus noticed my gaze and shouted angrily:</p>
			<p>“Why do you look at me like that, Wondergood? It’s silly! You are thinking of my ambition? That’s foolish, Wondergood! Would not <em>you</em>, a gentleman of Illinois, also like to be … well, at least, Emperor of <em>Russia</em>, where the <em>will</em> is still above the law?”</p>
			<p>“And on what particular throne have you your eye, Magnus?” I replied, no longer concealing my irony.</p>
			<p>“If you are pleased to think of me so flatteringly, Wondergood, I will tell you that I <em>aim</em> much higher. Nonsense, my friend! Only bloodless moralists have never dreamt of a crown, just as only eunuchs have never tempted themselves with the thought of woman. Nonsense! But I do not seek a throne⁠—not even the Russian throne: it is too cramping.”</p>
			<p>“But there is another throne, Signor Magnus: the throne of God.”</p>
			<p>“But why only the throne of God? And have you forgotten Satan’s, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”</p>
			<p>And this he said to Me … or did the whole street know that my throne was vacant? I bowed my head respectfully and said:</p>
			<p>“Permit me to be the first to greet you … Your Majesty.”</p>
			<p>Magnus turned on me in wild wrath, gnashing his teeth, like a dog over a contested bone. And this angry atom wants to be Satan! This handful of earth, hardly enough for one whiff for the Devil, is dreaming to be crowned with my crown! I bowed my head still lower and dropped my eyes: I felt the gleaming flame of contempt and divine laughter blazing forth within them. I realized that it must not be given to my honored ward to know this <em>laughter</em>. I do not know how long we remained silent, but when our eyes met again they were clear, pure and innocent, like two bright rays in the shade. Magnus was the first to speak:</p>
			<p>“And so?” he said.</p>
			<p>“And so?” I replied.</p>
			<p>“Will you order money for the king?”</p>
			<p>“The money is at your disposal, my dear friend.”</p>
			<p>Magnus looked at me thoughtfully.</p>
			<p>“It’s not worth while,” he decided. “This miracle is old stuff. It requires too many police to compel belief. We shall perform a better miracle.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, undoubtedly. We shall contrive a better device. In two weeks?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, about that!” replied Magnus cordially.</p>
			<p>We shook hands warmly in parting and in about two hours the gracious king sent each of us a decoration: some sort of a star for me and something else for Magnus. I rather pitied the poor idiot who continued to play his lone hand.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
