<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>February 23: Villa Orsini</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary-entry">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">February 23: Villa Orsini</h2>
				<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">February 23.<br/>
				Villa Orsini.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Thomas Magnus was not at home and, to my great surprise, I was received by Maria.</p>
			<p>I do not suppose you would be interested in how I greeted her and what I mumbled in the first few moments of our meeting. I can only say that I mumbled and that I felt a strong impulse to laugh. I could not lift my eyes to gaze upon Maria until my thoughts cast off their soiled garb and donned clean attire. As you see, I did not lose consciousness altogether! But in vain did I take these precautions: <em>that</em> torture did not follow. Maria’s gaze was clear and simple and it contained neither searching, penetrating fire nor fatal forgiveness. It was calm and clear, like the sky of the Campagna and⁠—I do not know how it happened⁠—it penetrated my entire being.</p>
			<p>She met me in the garden. We sat down by the gate, from which vantage point we had a good view of the Campagna. When you gaze at the Campagna you cannot prattle nonsense. No, it was she who gazed at the Campagna and I gazed into her eyes⁠—clear to the seventh sky, where you end the count of your heavens. We were silent or⁠—if you regard the following as conversation⁠—we spoke:</p>
			<p>“Are those mountains?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, those are the mountains of Albania. And there⁠—is Tivoli.”</p>
			<p>She picked out little white houses in the distance and pointed them out to me and I felt a peculiar calm and joy in Maria’s gaze. The suspicious resemblance of Maria to the Madonna no longer troubled me: how can I possibly be troubled by the fact that you resemble <em>yourself</em>? And came a moment when a great peace of mind descended upon <em>me</em>. I have no words of comparison whereby to reveal to you that great and bright calm. … I am forever conjuring up before me that accursed schooner with its lowered sails, on which I never really sailed, for I am afraid of seasickness! Or is it because on this night of my loneliness, my road is being illuminated by the <em>Star of the Seas</em>? Well, yes, I was a schooner, if you so desire it, and if this is not agreeable to you I was <em>All</em>. Besides I was <em>Nothing</em>. You see what nonsense emerges out of all this talk when Wondergood begins to seek words and comparisons.</p>
			<p>I was so calm that I even soon began to gaze into Maria’s eyes: I simply <em>believed</em> them. This is deeper than mere gazing. When necessary I shall find those eyes again. In the meantime I shall remain a schooner with sails lowered. I shall be <em>All</em> and I shall be <em>Nothing</em>. Only once did a slight breeze stir my sails, but only for a moment: that was when Maria pointed out the Tiberian road to me, cutting the green hills like a white thread, and asked whether I had ever traversed it before.</p>
			<p>“Yes, occasionally, Signorina.”</p>
			<p>“I often gaze upon this road and think that it must be extremely pleasant to traverse it by automobile.”</p>
			<p>“Have you a swift car, Signor?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, Signorina, very swift! But those,” I continued in gentle reproach, “who are themselves limitless distances and endlessness are in no need of any movement.”</p>
			<p>Maria and an automobile! A winged angel entering a trolley car for the sake of speed! A swallow riding on a turtle! An arrow on the humpy back of a hod carrier! Ah, all comparisons lie: why speak of swallows and arrows, why speak of any movement for Maria, who embraces all distances! But it is only now that I thought of the trolley and the turtle. At that time I felt so calm and peaceful, I was deep in such bliss that I could think of nothing except that countenance of eternity and undying light!</p>
			<p>A great calm came upon Me on that day and nothing could disturb my endless bliss. It was not long before Thomas Magnus returned, and a flying fish, gleaming for a moment above the ocean, could no more disturb its blue smoothness than did Magnus disturb me. I <em>received</em> him into my heart. I swallowed him calmly and felt no heavier burden in my stomach than a whale does after swallowing a herring. It was gratifying to find Magnus hospitable and merry. He pressed my hand and his eyes were bright and kind. Even his face seemed less pale and not as weary as usual.</p>
			<p>I was invited to breakfast … lest it worry you, let me say right now that I remained until late in the evening. When Maria had retired I told Magnus of the visit of Cardinal <abbr class="name eoc">X.</abbr> His merry face darkened slightly and in his eyes appeared his former hostile flame.</p>
			<p>“Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr>? He <em>came</em> to see you?”</p>
			<p>I narrated to him in detail my conversation with “the shaven monkey,” and remarked that he had impressed me as a scoundrel of no small caliber. Magnus frowned and said sternly:</p>
			<p>“You laugh in vain, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. I have long known Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr> and … I have been keeping a close eye on him. He is evil, cruel and dangerous. Despite his ridiculous exterior, he is as cunning, merciless and revengeful as Satan!”</p>
			<p>And you, too, Magnus! Like Satan! This blue-faced, shaven orang-outang, this caressing gorilla, this monkey cavorting before a looking-glass! But I have exhausted my capacity for insult. Magnus’ remark fell like a stone to the bottom of my bliss. I listened further:</p>
			<p>“His flirting with the Socialists, his jokes at the expense of Galileo are all lies. Just as the enemies of Cromwell hanged him after his death, so would Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr> burn the bones of Galileo with immense satisfaction: to this day he regards the movement of the earth as a personal affront. It is an old school, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood; he will stop at nothing to overcome obstacles, be it poison or murder, which he will take care to attribute to the misfortune of accident. You smile but I cannot discuss the Vatican smilingly, not so long as it contains such … and it will always produce someone like Cardinal <abbr class="name eoc">X.</abbr> Look out, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood: You have landed within the sphere of his vision and interests, and, let me assure you, that scores of eyes are now watching you … perhaps me, too. Be on your guard, my friend!”</p>
			<p>Magnus was quite excited. Fervently I shook his hand:</p>
			<p>“Ah, Magnus! … But when will you agree to help me?”</p>
			<p>“But you know that I do not like human beings. It is <em>you</em> who loves them <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, not I.”</p>
			<p>A gleam of irony appeared in his eyes.</p>
			<p>“The Cardinal says that it is not at all necessary to love people in order to be happy. … The contrary, he says!”</p>
			<p>“And who told you that I want to make people happy? Again, it is <em>you</em> who wants to do that, not I. Hand over your billions to Cardinal <abbr class="name eoc">X.</abbr> His recipe for happiness is not worse than other patent medicines. To be sure, his recipe has one disadvantage: while dispensing <em>happiness</em> it destroys <em>people</em> … but is that important? You are too much of a business man, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, and I see that you are not sufficiently familiar with the world of our inventors of the Best Means for the Happiness of Mankind: These means are more numerous than the so-called best tonics for the growth of hair. I myself was a dreamer at one time and invented one or two in my youth … but I was short on chemistry and badly singed my hair in an explosion. I am very glad I did not come across your billions in <em>those</em> days. I am joking, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, but if you wish to be serious, here is my answer: keep on growing and multiplying your hogs, make four of your three billions, continue selling your conserves, provided they are not too rotten, and cease worrying about the happiness of Mankind. As long as the world likes good ham it will not deny you its love and admiration!”</p>
			<p>“And how about those who have no means to buy ham?”</p>
			<p>“What do you care about them? It is their belly⁠—pardon me for the expression⁠—that is rumbling with hunger, not yours. I congratulate you upon your new home: I know the Villa Orsini very well. It is a magnificent relic of Old Rome.”</p>
			<p>I balked at the prospect of another lecture on my palace! Yes, Magnus had again shoved me aside. He did it brusquely and roughly. But his voice lacked sternness and he gazed at me softly and kindly. Well, what of it? To the devil with humanity, its happiness and its ham! I shall try later to bore an entrance into Magnus’ brain. In the meantime leave me alone with my great peace and … Maria. Boundless peace and … Satan!⁠—isn’t that a splendid touch in my play? And what kind of a liar is he who can fool only others? To lie to oneself and believe it⁠—that is an art!</p>
			<p>After breakfast all <em>three</em> of us walked over the downy hills and slopes of the Campagna. It was still early Spring and only little white flowers gently brightened the young, green earth. A soft breeze diffused the scents of the season, while little houses gleamed in distant Albano. Maria walked in front of us, stopping now and then and casting her heavenly eyes upon everything they could envisage. When I return to Rome I shall order my brush-pusher to paint Madonna thus: On a carpet of soft green and little white flowers. Magnus was so frank and merry that I again drew his attention to Maria’s resemblance to the Madonna and told him of the miserable brush-pushers in search of a model. He laughed, agreed with me in my opinion of the aforementioned resemblance, and grew wistful.</p>
			<p>“It is a <em>fatal</em> resemblance, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. You remember that heavy moment when I spoke to you of <em>blood</em>? Already there is blood at the feet of Maria … the blood of one noble youth whose memory Maria and I cherish. There are fatal faces, there are fatal <em>resemblances</em> which confuse our souls and lead to the abyss of self destruction. I am the father of Maria, and yet I myself hardly dare to touch her brow with my lips. What insurmountable barriers does love raise for itself when it dares to lift its eyes upon Maria?”</p>
			<p>This was the only moment of that happy day when my ocean became overcast with heavy clouds, as tangled as the beard of “Mad King Lear,” while a wild wind shook the sails of my schooner. But I lifted my eyes to Maria, I met her gaze. It was bright and calm, like the sky above us⁠—and the wild wind disappeared without trace, bearing away with it fragments of the darkness. I do not know whether you understand these sea comparisons, which I consider quite inadequate. Let me explain: I again grew quite calm. What is that noble Roman youth to me, who himself unable to find <em>comparisons</em> was hurled over the head of his Pegasus? I am a white-winged schooner and beneath me is an entire ocean, and was it not written of Her: the <em>Incomparable</em>?</p>
			<p>The day was long and quiet and I was charmed with the precision with which the sun rolled down from its height to the rim of the earth, with the measured pace with which the stars covered the heavens, the large stars first, then the little ones, until the whole sky sparkled and gleamed. Slowly grew the darkness. Then came the rosy moon, at first somewhat rusty, then brilliant, and swam majestically over the road made free and warm by the sun. But more than anything else did I and Magnus feel charmed when we sat in the half-darkened room and heard Maria: she played the harp and sang.</p>
			<p>And listening to the strains of the harp I realized why man likes music produced by taut strings: I was myself a taut string and even when the finger no longer touched me, the sound continued to vibrate and died so slowly that I can still hear it in the depths of my soul. And suddenly I saw that the entire air was filled with taut and trembling strings: they extend from star to star, scatter themselves over the earth and penetrate my heart … like a network of telephone wires through a central station⁠—if you want more simple comparisons. And there was <em>something else</em> I understood when I heard <em>Maria’s</em> voice. …</p>
			<p>No, you are simply an animal, Wondergood! When I recall your loud complaints against love and its songs, cursed with the curse of monotony⁠—is that not your own expression?⁠—I feel like sending you off to a barn. You are a dull and dirty animal and I am ashamed that for a whole hour I listened to your silly bellowing. You may hold words in contempt, you may curse your embraces, but do not touch Love, my friend: only through love has it been given to you to obtain a glimpse into Eternity! Away, my friend! Leave Satan to himself, he who in the very blackest depths of man has suddenly come upon new and unexpected flames. Away! You must not see the <em>joy</em> and <em>astonishment</em> of Satan!</p>
			<p>The hour was late. The moon indicated midnight when I left Magnus and ordered the chauffeur to drive by way of the Numentinian road: I feared lest this great calm might slip away from me, and I wanted to overtake it in the depths of the Campagna. But the speed of the car broke the silence and I left my machine. It went to sleep at once beneath the light of the moon over its own shadow and looked like a huge, gray stone barring the road. For the last time its lights gleamed upon Me and it became transformed into something invisible. I was left alone with my shadow.</p>
			<p>We walked along the white road, I and my shadow, stopping occasionally and then again resuming our march. I sat down on a stone along the road and the black shadow hid behind my back. And here a great quiet descended upon the earth, upon the world. Upon my chilled brow I felt the cool touch of the moon’s kiss.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
