<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<section id="entry-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">January 18.<br/>
					On board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Atlantic</i>.</p>
				</header>
				<p>This is exactly the tenth day since I have become human and am leading this earthly life.</p>
				<p>My loneliness is very great. I am not in need of friends, but I must speak of Myself and I have no one to speak to. Thoughts alone are not sufficient, and they will not become quite clear, precise and exact until I express them in words. It is necessary to arrange them in a row, like soldiers or telephone poles, to lay them out like a railway track, to throw across bridges and viaducts, to construct barrows and enclosures, to indicate stations in certain places⁠—and only then will everything become clear. This laborious engineering work, I think, they call logic and consistency, and is essential to those who desire to be wise. It is not essential to all others. They may wander about as they please.</p>
				<p>The work is slow, difficult and repulsive for one who is accustomed to⁠—I do not know what to call it⁠—to embracing all in one breath and expressing all in a single breath. It is not in vain that men respect their thinkers so much, and it is not in vain that these unfortunate thinkers, if they are honest and conscientious in this process of construction, as ordinary engineers, end in insane asylums. I am but a few days on this earth and more than once have the yellow walls of the insane asylum and its luring open door flashed before my eyes.</p>
				<p>Yes, it is extremely difficult and irritates one’s “nerves.” I have just now wasted so much of the ship’s fine stationery to express a little ordinary thought on the inadequacy of man’s words and logic. What will it be necessary to waste to give expression to the great and the unusual? I want to warn you, my earthly reader, at the very outset, not to gape in astonishment. The <em>extraordinary cannot be expressed</em> in the language of your grumbling. If you do not believe me, go to the nearest insane asylum and listen to the inmates: they have all realized <em>Something</em> and wanted to give expression to it. And now you can hear the roar and rumble of these wrecked engines, their wheels revolving and hissing in the air, and you can see with what difficulty they manage to hold intact the rapidly dissolving features of their astonished faces!</p>
				<p>I see you are all ready to ply me with questions, now that you learned that I am Satan in human form: it is so fascinating! Whence did I come? What are the ways of Hell? Is there immortality there, and, also, what is the price of coal at the stock exchange of Hell? Unfortunately, my dear reader, despite my desire to the contrary, if I had such a desire, I am powerless to satisfy your very proper curiosity. I could have composed for your benefit one of those funny little stories about horny and hairy devils, which appeal so much to your meagre imagination, but you have had enough of them already and I do not want to lie so rudely and ungracefully. I will lie to you elsewhere, when you least expect it, and that will be far more interesting for both of us.</p>
				<p>And the truth⁠—how am I to tell it when even my Name cannot be expressed in your tongue? You have called me Satan and I accept the name, just as I would have accepted any other: Be it so⁠—I am Satan. But my real name sounds quite different, quite different! It has an extraordinary sound and try as I may I cannot force it into your narrow ear without tearing it open together with your brain: Be it so⁠—I am Satan. And nothing more.</p>
				<p>And you yourself are to blame for this, my friend: why is there so little understanding in your reason? Your reason is like a beggar’s sack, containing only crusts of stale bread, while it is necessary to have something more than bread. You have but two conceptions of existence: life and death. How, then, can I reveal to you the <em>third</em>? All your existence is an absurdity only because you do not have this <em>third conception</em>. And where can I get it for you? Today I am human, even as you. In my skull is your brain. In my mouth are your cubic words, jostling one another about with their sharp corners, and I cannot tell you of the Extraordinary.</p>
				<p>If I were to tell you that there are no devils I would lie. But if I say that such creatures do exist I also deceive you. You see how difficult it is, how absurd, my friend!</p>
				<p>I can also tell you but little that you would understand of how I assumed the human form, with which I began my earthly life ten days ago. First of all, forget about your favorite, hairy, horny, winged devils, who breathe fire, transform fragments of earthenware into gold and change old men into fascinating youths, and having done all this and prattled much nonsense, they disappear suddenly through a wall. Remember: when <em>we</em> want to visit your earth <em>we</em> must always become human. Why this is so you will learn after your death. Meanwhile remember: I am a human being now like yourself. There is not the foul smell of a goat about me but the fragrance of perfume, and you need not fear to shake My hand lest I may scratch you with my nails: I manicure them just as you do.</p>
				<p>But how did it all happen? Very simply. When I first conceived the desire to visit this earth I selected as the most satisfactory lodging a 38-year-old American billionaire, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Henry Wondergood. I killed him at night⁠—of course, not in the presence of witnesses. But you cannot bring me to court despite this confession, because the American is <strong>alive</strong>, and we both greet you with one respectful bow: I and Wondergood. He simply rented his empty place to me. You understand? And not all of it either, the devil take him! And, to my great regret I can <em>return</em> only through the same door which leads you too to liberty: through death.</p>
				<p>This is the most important thing. You may understand something of what I may have to say later on, although to speak to you of such matters in your language is like trying to conceal a mountain in a vest pocket or to empty Niagara with a thimble. Imagine, for example, that you, my dear King of Nature, should want to come closer to the ants, and that by some miracle you became a real little ant⁠—then you may have some conception of that gulf which separates Me now from what I was. No, still more! Imagine that you were a sound and have become a mere symbol⁠—a musical mark on paper.⁠ ⁠… No, still worse!⁠—No comparisons can make clear to you that terrible gulf whose bottom even I do not see as yet. Or, perhaps, there is no bottom there at all.</p>
				<p>Think of it: for two days, after leaving New York, I suffered from seasickness! This sounds queer to you, who are accustomed to wallow in your own dirt? Well, I⁠—I have also wallowed in it but it was not queer at all. I only smiled once in thinking that <em>it</em> was not I, but Wondergood, and said:</p>
				<p>“Roll on, Wondergood, roll on!”</p>
				<p>There is another question to which you probably want an answer: Why did I come to this earth and accept such an unprofitable exchange: to be transformed from Satan, “the mighty, immortal chieftain and ruler” into you? I am tired of seeking words that cannot be found. I will answer you in English, French, Italian or German⁠—languages we both understand well. I have grown lonesome in Hell and I have come upon the earth to lie and play.</p>
				<p>You know what ennui is. And as for falsehood, you know it well too. And as for <em>play</em>⁠—you can judge it to a certain extent by your own theaters and celebrated actors. Perhaps you yourself are playing a little role in Parliament, at home, or in your church. If you are, you may understand something of the <em>satisfaction</em> of play. And, if in addition, you are familiar with the multiplication table, then multiply the delight and joy of play into any considerable figure and you will get an idea of My enjoyment, of My play. No, imagine that you are an ocean wave, which plays eternally and lives only in play⁠—take this wave, for example, which I see outside the porthole now and which wants to lift our <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Atlantic</i>⁠ ⁠… but, here I am again seeking words and comparisons!</p>
				<p>I simply want to play. At present I am still an unknown actor, a modest débutante, but I hope to become no less a celebrity than your own Garrick or Aldrich, after I have played what I please. I am proud, selfish and even, if you please, vain and boastful. You know what vanity is, when you crave the praise and plaudits even of a fool? Then I entertain the brazen idea that I am a genius. Satan is known for his brazenness. And so, imagine, that I have grown weary of Hell where all these hairy and horny rogues play and lie no worse than I do, and that I am no longer satisfied with the laurels of Hell, in which I but perceive no small measure of base flattery and downright stupidity. But I have heard of you, my earthly friend; I have heard that you are wise, tolerably honest, properly incredulous, responsive to the problems of eternal art and that you yourself play and lie so badly that you might appreciate the playing of others: not in vain have you so many <em>great actors</em>. And so I have come. You understand?</p>
				<p>My stage is the earth and the nearest scene for which I am now bound is Rome, the Eternal City, as it is called here, in your profound conception of eternity and other simple matters. I have not yet selected my company (would you not like to join it?). But I believe that <em>Fate</em> and <em>Chance</em>, to whom I am now subservient, like all your earthly things, will realize my unselfish motives and will send me worthy partners. Old Europe is so rich in talents! I believe that I shall find a keen and appreciative audience in Europe, too. I confess that I first thought of going to the East, which some of my compatriots made their scene of activity some time ago with no small measure of success, but the East is too credulous and is inclined too much to poison and the ballet. Its gods are ludicrous. The East still reeks too much of hairy animals. Its lights and shadows are barbarously crude and too bright to make it worth while for a refined artist as I am to go into that crowded, foul circus tent. Ah, my friend, I am so vain that I even begin this Diary not without the secret intention of impressing you with my modesty in the role of <em>seeker</em> of words and comparisons. I hope you will not take advantage of my frankness and cease believing me.</p>
				<p>Are there any other questions? Of the play itself I have no clear idea yet. It will be composed by the same impresario who will assemble the actors⁠—<em>Fate</em>. My modest role, as a beginning, will be that of a man who so loves his fellow beings that he is willing to give them everything, his soul and his money. Of course, you have not forgotten that I am a billionaire? I have three billion dollars. Sufficient⁠—is it not?⁠—for one spectacular performance. One more detail before I conclude this page.</p>
				<p>I have with me, sharing my fate, a certain Irwin Toppi, my secretary⁠—a most worthy person in his black frock coat and silk top hat, his long nose resembling an unripened pear and his smoothly shaven, pastor-like face. I would not be surprised to find a prayer book in his pocket. My Toppi came upon this earth from <em>there</em>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> from Hell and by the same means as mine: he, too, assumed the human form and, it seems, quite successfully⁠—the rogue is entirely immune from seasickness. However to be seasick one must have some brains and my Toppi is unusually stupid⁠—even for this earth. Besides, he is impolite and ventures to offer advice. I am rather sorry that out of our entire wealth of material I did not select someone better, but I was impressed by his honesty and partial familiarity with the earth: it seemed more pleasant to enter upon this little jaunt with an experienced comrade. Quite a long time ago he once before assumed the human form and was so taken by religious sentiments that⁠—think of it!⁠—he entered a Franciscan monastery, lived there to a ripe old age and died peacefully under the name of Brother Vincent. His ashes became the object of veneration for believers⁠—not a bad career for a fool of a devil. No sooner did he enter upon this trip with Me than he began to sniff about for incense⁠—an incurable habit! You will probably like him.</p>
				<p>And now enough. Get thee hence, my friend. I wish to be alone. Your shallow reflection upon this wall wears upon me. I wish to be alone or only with this Wondergood who has leased his abode to Me and seems to have gotten the best of Me somehow or other. The sea is calm. I am no longer nauseated but I am afraid of something. I am afraid! I fear this darkness which they call night and descends upon the ocean: here, in the cabin there is still some light, but there, on deck, there is terrible darkness, and My eyes are quite helpless. These silly reflectors⁠—they are worthless. They are able to reflect things by day but in the darkness they lose even this miserable power. Of course I shall get used to the darkness. I have already grown used to many things. But just now I am ill at ease and it is horrible to think that the mere turn of a key obsesses me with this blind ever present darkness. Whence does it come?</p>
				<p>And how brave men are with their dim reflectors: they see nothing and simply say: it is dark here, we must make a light! Then they themselves put it out and go to sleep. I regard these braves with a kind of cold wonder and I am seized with admiration. Or must one possess a great mind to appreciate horror, like Mine? You are not such a coward, Wondergood. You always bore the reputation of being a hardened man and a man of experience!</p>
				<p>There is one moment in the process of my assumption of the human form that I cannot recollect without horror. That was when for the first time I heard the beating of My heart. This regular, loud, metronome-like sound, which speaks as much of death as of life, filled me with the hitherto inexperienced sensation of horror. Men are always quarrelling about accounts, but how can they carry in their breasts <em>this</em> counting machine, registering with the speed of a magician the fleeting seconds of life?</p>
				<p>At first I wanted to shout and to run back <em>below</em>, before I could grow accustomed to life, but here I looked at Toppi: this newborn fool was calmly brushing his top hat with the sleeve of his frock coat. I broke out into laughter and cried:</p>
				<p>“Toppi, the brush!”</p>
				<p>We both brushed ourselves while the counting machine in my breast was computing the seconds and, it seemed to me, adding on a few for good measure. Finally, hearing its brazen beating, I thought I might not have time enough to finish my toillette. I have been in a great hurry for some time. Just what it was I would not be able to complete I did not know, but for two days I was in a mad rush to eat and drink and even sleep: the counting machine was beating away while I lay in slumber!</p>
				<p>But I never rush now. I know that I will manage to get through and my moments seem inexhaustible. But the little machine keeps on beating just the same, like a drunken soldier at a drum. And how about the very moments it is using up now. Are they to be counted as equal to the great ones? Then I say it is all a fraud and I protest as a honest citizen of the United States and as a merchant.</p>
				<p>I do not feel well. Yet I would not repulse even a friend at this moment. Ah! In all the universe I am alone!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="entry-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">February 7, 1914.<br/>
					Rome, Hotel “Internationale.”</p>
				</header>
				<p>I am driven mad whenever I am compelled to seize the club of a policeman to bring order in my brain: facts, to the right! thoughts, to the left! moods, to the rear⁠—clear the road for His Highness, Conscience, which barely moves about upon its stilts. I am compelled to do this: otherwise there would be a riot, an abrecadebra, chaos. And so I call you to order, gentleman⁠—facts and lady-thoughts. I begin.</p>
				<p>Night. Darkness. The air is balmy. There is a pleasant fragrance. Toppi is enchanted. We are in Italy. Our speeding train is approaching Rome. We are enjoying our soft couches when, suddenly, crash! Everything flies to the devil: the train has gone out of its mind. It is wrecked. I confess without shame that I am not very brave, that I was seized with terror and seemed to have lost consciousness. The lights were extinguished and with much labor I crawled out of the corner into which I had been hurled. I seemed to have forgotten the exit. There were only walls and corners. I felt something stinging and beating at Me, and all about nothing but darkness. Suddenly I felt a body beneath my feet. I stepped right upon the face. Only afterwards did I discover that the body was that of George, my lackey, killed outright. I shouted and my obliging Toppi came to my aid: he seized me by the arm and led me to an open window, as both exits had been barricaded by fragments of the car and baggage. I leaped out, but Toppi lingered behind. My knees were trembling. I was groaning but still he failed to appear. I shouted. Suddenly he reappeared at the window and shouted back:</p>
				<p>“What are you crying about? I am looking for our hats and your portfolio.”</p>
				<p>A few moments later he returned and handed me my hat. He himself had his silk top hat on and carried the portfolio. I shook with laughter and said:</p>
				<p>“Young man, you have forgotten the umbrella!”</p>
				<p>But the old buffoon has no sense of humor. He replied seriously:</p>
				<p>“I do not carry an umbrella. And do you know, our George is dead and so is the chef.”</p>
				<p>So, this fallen carcass which has no feelings and upon whose face one steps with impunity is our George! I was again seized with terror and suddenly my ears were pierced with groans, wild shrieks, whistlings and cries! All the sounds wherewith these braves wail when they are crushed. At first I was deafened. I heard nothing. The cars caught fire. The flames and smoke shot up into the air. The wounded began to groan and, without waiting for the flesh to roast, I darted like a flash into the field. What a leap!</p>
				<p>Fortunately the low hills of the Roman Campagna are very convenient for this kind of sport and I was no means behind in the line of runners. When, out of breath, I hurled myself upon the ground, it was no longer possible to hear or see anything. Only Toppi was approaching. But what a terrible thing this heart is! My face touched the earth. The earth was cool, firm, calm and here I liked it. It seemed as if it had restored my breath and put my heart back into its place. I felt easier. The stars above were calm. There was nothing for them to get excited about. They were not concerned with things below. They merely shine in triumph. That is their eternal ball. And at this brilliant ball the earth, clothed in darkness, appeared as an enchanting stranger in a black mask. (Not at all badly expressed? I trust that you, my reader, will be pleased: my style and my manners are improving!)</p>
				<p>I kissed Toppi in the darkness. I always kiss those I like in the darkness. And I said:</p>
				<p>“You are carrying your human form, Toppi, very well. I respect you. But what are we to do now? Those lights yonder in the sky⁠—they are the lights of Rome. But they are too far away!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, it is Rome,” affirmed Toppi, and raised his hand: “do you hear whistling?”</p>
				<p>From somewhere in the distance came the long-drawn, piercing, shrieking of locomotives. They were sounding the alarm.</p>
				<p>“Yes, they are whistling,” I said and laughed.</p>
				<p>“They are whistling!” repeated Toppi smiling. He never laughs.</p>
				<p>But here again I began to feel uncomfortable. I was cold, lonely, quivering. In my feet there was still the sensation of treading upon corpses. I wanted to shake myself like a dog after a bath. You must understand me: it was the first time that I had seen and felt your corpse, my dear reader, and if you pardon me, it did not appeal to me at all. Why did it not protest when I walked over its face? George had such a beautiful young face and he carried himself with much dignity. Remember your face, too, may be trod upon. And will you, too, remain submissive?</p>
				<p>We did not proceed to Rome but went instead in search of the nearest night lodging. We walked long. We grew tired. We longed to drink, oh, how we longed to drink! And now, permit me to present to you my new friend, Signor Thomas Magnus and his beautiful daughter, Maria.</p>
				<p>At first we observed the faint flicker of a light. As we approached nearer we found a little house, its white walls gleaming through a thicket of dark cypress trees and shrubbery. There was a light in one of the windows, the rest were barricaded with shutters. The house had a stone fence, an iron gate, strong doors. And⁠—silence. At first glance it all looked suspicious. Toppi knocked. Again silence. I knocked. Still silence. Finally there came a gruff voice, asking from behind the iron door:</p>
				<p>“Who are you? What do you want?”</p>
				<p>Hardly mumbling with his parched tongue, my brave Toppi narrated the story of the catastrophe and our escape. He spoke at length and then came the click of a lock and the door was opened. Following behind our austere and silent stranger we entered the house, passed through several dark and silent rooms, walked up a flight of creaking stairs into a brightly lighted room, apparently the stranger’s workroom. There was much light, many books, with one open beneath a low lamp shaded by a simple, green globe. We had not noticed this light in the field. But what astonished me was the silence of the house. Despite the rather early hour not a move, not a sound, not a voice was to be heard.</p>
				<p>“Have a seat.”</p>
				<p>We sat down and Toppi, now almost in pain, began again to narrate his story. But the strange host interrupted him:</p>
				<p>“Yes, a catastrophe. They often occur on our roads. Were there many victims?”</p>
				<p>Toppi continued his prattle and the host, while listening to him, took a revolver out of his pocket and hid it in a table drawer, adding carelessly:</p>
				<p>“This is not⁠—a particularly quiet neighborhood. Well, please, remain here.”</p>
				<p>For the first time he raised his dark eyebrows and his large dim eyes and studied us intently as if he were gazing upon something savage in a museum. It was an impolite and brazen stare. I arose and said:</p>
				<p>“I fear that we are not welcome here, Signor, and⁠—”</p>
				<p>He stopped Me with an impatient and slightly sarcastic gesture.</p>
				<p>“Nonsense, you remain here. I will get you some wine and food. My servant is here in the daytime only, so allow me to wait on you. You will find the bathroom behind this door. Go wash and freshen up while I get the wine. Make yourself at home.”</p>
				<p>While we ate and drank⁠—with savage relish, I confess⁠—this unsympathetic gentleman kept on reading a book as if there were no one else in the room, undisturbed by Toppi’s munching and the dog’s struggle with a bone. I studied my host carefully. Almost my height, his pale face bore an expression of weariness. He had a black, oily, bandit-like beard. But his brow was high and his nose betrayed good sense. How would you describe it? Well, here again I seek comparisons. Imagine the nose betraying the story of a great, passionate, extraordinary, secret life. It is beautiful and seems to have been made not out of muscle and cartilage, but out of⁠—what do you call it?⁠—out of thoughts and brazen desires. He seems quite brave too. But I was particularly attracted by his hands: very big, very white and giving the impression of self-control. I do not know why his hands attracted me so much. But suddenly I thought: how beautifully exact the number of fingers, exactly ten of them, ten thin, evil, wise, crooked fingers!</p>
				<p>I said politely:</p>
				<p>“Thank you, signor⁠—”</p>
				<p>He replied:</p>
				<p>“My name is Magnus. Thomas Magnus. Have some wine? Americans?”</p>
				<p>I waited for Toppi to introduce me, according to the English custom, and I looked toward Magnus. One had to be an ignorant, illiterate animal not to know me.</p>
				<p>Toppi broke in:</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Henry Wondergood of Illinois. His secretary, Irwin Toppi, your obedient servant. Yes, citizens of the United States.”</p>
				<p>The old buffoon blurted out his tirade, evincing a thorough lack of pride, and Magnus⁠—yes, he was a little startled. Billions, my friend, billions. He gazed at Me long and intently:</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood? Henry Wondergood? Are you not, sir, that American billionaire who seeks to bestow upon humanity the benefits of his billions?”</p>
				<p>I modestly shook my head in the affirmative.</p>
				<p>“Yes, I am the gentleman.”</p>
				<p>Toppi shook his head in affirmation⁠—the ass:</p>
				<p>“Yes, we are the gentlemen.”</p>
				<p>Magnus bowed and said with a tinge of irony in his voice:</p>
				<p>“Humanity is awaiting you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. Judging by the Roman newspapers it is extremely impatient. But I must crave your pardon for this very modest meal: I did not know.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>I seized his large, strangely warm hand and shaking it violently, in American fashion, I said:</p>
				<p>“Nonsense, Signor Magnus. I was a swineherd before I became a billionaire, while you are a straightforward, honest and noble gentleman, whose hand I press with the utmost respect. The devil take it, not a single human face has yet aroused in me as much sympathy as yours!”</p>
				<p>Magnus said.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Magnus said nothing! I cannot continue this: “I said,” “he said,”⁠—This cursed consistency is deadly to my inspiration. It transforms me into a silly romanticist of a boulevard sheet and makes me lie like a mediocrity. I have five senses. I am a complete human being and yet I speak only of the hearing. And how about the sight? I assure you it did not remain idle. And this sensation of the earth, of Italy, of My existence which I now perceive with a new and sweet strength! You imagine that all I did was to listen to wise Thomas Magnus. He speaks and I gaze, understand, answer, while I think: what a beautiful earth, what a beautiful Campagna di Roma! I persisted in penetrating the recesses of the house, into its locked silent rooms. With every moment my joy mounted at the thought that I am alive, that I can speak and play and, suddenly, I rather liked the idea of being human.</p>
				<p>I remember that I held out my card to Magnus. “Henry Wondergood.” He was surprised, but laid the card politely on the table. I felt like implanting a kiss on his brow for this politeness, for the fact that he too was human. I, too, am human. I was particularly proud of my foot encased in a fine, tan leather shoe and I persisted in swinging it: swing on beautiful, human, American foot! I was extremely emotional that evening! I even wanted to weep: to look my host straight in the eyes and to squeeze out of my own eyes, so full of love and goodness, two little tears. I actually did it, for at that moment I felt a little pleasant sting in my nose, as if it had been hit by a spurt of lemonade. I observed that my two little tears made an impression upon Magnus.</p>
				<p>But Toppi!⁠—While I experienced this wondrous poem of feeling human and even of weeping⁠—he slept like a dead one at the very same table. I was rather angered. This was really going too far. I wanted to shout at him, but Magnus restrained me:</p>
				<p>“He has had a good deal of excitement and is weary, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood.”</p>
				<p>The hour had really grown late. We had been talking and arguing with Magnus for two hours when Toppi fell asleep. I sent him off to bed while we continued to talk and drink for quite a while. I drank more wine, but Magnus restrained himself. There was a dimness about his face. I was beginning to develop an admiration for his grim and, at times, evil, secretive countenance. He said:</p>
				<p>“I believe in your altruistic passion, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. But I do not believe that you, a man of wisdom and of action, and, it seems to me, somewhat cold, could place any serious hopes upon your money⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Three billion dollars⁠—that is a mighty power, Magnus!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, three billion dollars, a mighty power, indeed,” he agreed, rather unwillingly⁠—“but what will you do with it?”</p>
				<p>I laughed.</p>
				<p>“You probably want to say what can this ignoramus of an American, this erstwhile swineherd, who knows swine better than he knows men, do with the money?”</p>
				<p>“The first business helps the other,” said Magnus.</p>
				<p>“I dare say you have but a slight opinion of this foolish philanthropist whose head has been turned by his gold,” said I. “Yes, to be sure, what can I do? I can open another university in Chicago, or another maternity hospital in San Francisco, or another humanitarian reformatory in New York.”</p>
				<p>“The latter would be a distinct work of mercy,” quoth Magnus. “Do not gaze at me with such reproach, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood: I am not jesting. You will find in me the same pure love for humanity which burns so fiercely in you.”</p>
				<p>He was laughing at me and I felt pity for him: not to love people! Miserable, unfortunate Magnus. I could kiss his brow with great pleasure! Not to love people!</p>
				<p>“Yes, I do not love them,” affirmed Magnus, “but I am glad that you do not intend to travel the conventional road of all American philanthropists. Your billions⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Three billions, Magnus! One could build a nation on this money⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Yes?⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Or destroy a nation,” said I. “With this gold, Magnus, one can start a war or a revolution⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Yes?⁠—”</p>
				<p>I actually succeeded in arousing his interest: his large white hands trembled slightly and in his eyes there gleamed for a moment a look of respect: “You, Wondergood, are not as foolish as I thought!” He arose, paced up and down the room, and halting before me asked sneeringly:</p>
				<p>“And you know exactly what your humanity needs most: the creation of a new or the destruction of the old state? War or peace? Rest or revolution? Who are you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood of Illinois, that you essay to solve <em>these</em> problems? You had better keep on building your maternity hospitals and universities. That is far less dangerous work.”</p>
				<p>I liked the man’s hauteur. I bowed my head modestly and said:</p>
				<p>“You are right, Signor Magnus. Who am I, Henry Wondergood, to undertake the solution of these problems? But I do not intend to solve them. I merely indicate them. I indicate them and I seek the solution. I seek the solution and the man who can give it to me. I have never read a serious book carefully. I see you have quite a supply of books here. You are a misanthrope, Magnus. You are too much of a European not to be easily disillusioned in things, while we, young America, believe in humanity. A man must be created. You in Europe are bad craftsmen and have created a bad man. We shall create a better one. I beg your pardon for my frankness. As long as I was merely Henry Wondergood I devoted myself only to the creation of pigs⁠—and my pigs, let me say to you, have been awarded no fewer medals and decorations than Field Marshal Moltke. But now I desire to create people.”</p>
				<p>Magnus smiled:</p>
				<p>“You are an alchemist, Wondergood: you would transform lead into gold!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I want to create gold and I seek the philosopher’s stone. But has it not already been found? It has been found, only you do not know how to use it: It is love. Ah, Magnus, I do not know yet what I will do, but my plans are heroic and magnificent. If not for that misanthropic smile of yours I might go further. Believe in Man, Magnus, and give me your aid. You know what Man needs most.”</p>
				<p>He said coldly and with sadness:</p>
				<p>“He needs prisons and gallows.”</p>
				<p>I exclaimed in anger (I am particularly adept in feigning anger):</p>
				<p>“You are slandering me, Magnus! I see that you must have experienced some very great misfortune, perhaps treachery and⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Hold on, Wondergood! I never speak of myself and do not like to hear others speak of me. Let it be sufficient for you to know that you are the first man in four years to break in upon my solitude and this only due to chance. I do not like people.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, pardon. But I do not believe it.”</p>
				<p>Magnus went over to the bookcase and with an expression of supreme contempt he seized the first volume he laid his hands upon.</p>
				<p>“And you who have read no books,” he said, “do you know what these books are about? Only about evil, about the mistakes and sufferings of humanity. They are filled with tears and blood, Wondergood. Look: in this thin little book which I clasp between two fingers is contained a whole ocean of human blood, and if you should take all of them together⁠—. And who has spilled this blood? The devil?”</p>
				<p>I felt flattered and wanted to bow in acknowledgment, but he threw the book aside and shouted:</p>
				<p>“No, sir: Man! Man has spilled this blood! Yes, I do read books but only for one purpose; to learn how to hate man and to hold him in contempt. You, Wondergood, have transformed your pigs into gold, yes? And I can see how your gold is being transformed back again into pigs. They will devour you, Wondergood. But I do not wish either to prattle or to lie: Throw your money into the sea or⁠—build some new prisons and gallows. You are vain like all men. Then go on building gallows. You will be respected by serious people, while the flock in general will call you great. Or, don’t you, American from Illinois, want to get into the Pantheon?”</p>
				<p>“No, Magnus!⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Blood!” cried Magnus. “Can’t you see that it is everywhere? Here it is on your boot now⁠—”</p>
				<p>I confess that at the moment Magnus appeared to be insane. I jerked my foot in sudden fear and only then did I perceive a dark, reddish spot on my shoe⁠—how dastardly!</p>
				<p>Magnus smiled and immediately regaining his composure continued calmly and without emotion:</p>
				<p>“I have unwittingly startled you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood? Nonsense! You probably stepped on something inadvertently. A mere trifle. But this conversation, a conversation I have not conducted for a number of years, makes me uneasy and⁠—good night, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. Tomorrow I shall have the honor of presenting you to my daughter, and now you will permit me⁠—”</p>
				<p>And so on. In short, this gentleman conducted me to my room in a most impolite manner and well nigh put me to bed. I offered no resistance: why should I? I must say that I did not like him at this moment. I was even pleased when he turned to go but, suddenly, he turned at the very threshold and stepping forward, stretched out his large white hands. And murmured:</p>
				<p>“Do you see these hands? There is blood on them! Let it be the blood of a scoundrel, a torturer, a tyrant, but it is the same, red human blood. Good night!”</p>
				<p>—He spoiled my night for me. I swear by eternal salvation that on that night I felt great pleasure in being a man, and I made myself thoroughly at home in his narrow human skin. It made me feel uncomfortable in the armpits. You see, I bought it ready made and thought that it would be as comfortable as if it had been made to measure! I was highly emotional. I was extremely good and affable. I was very eager to play, but I was not inclined to tragedy! Blood! How can any person of good breeding thrust his white hands under the nose of a stranger⁠—Hangmen have very white hands!</p>
				<p>Do not think I am jesting. I did not feel well. In the daytime I still manage to subdue Wondergood but at night he lays his hands upon me. It is he who fills me with his silly dreams and shakes within me his entire dusty archive⁠—And how godlessly silly and meaningless are his dreams! He fusses about within me all night long like a returned master, seems to be looking about for something, grumbles about losses and wear and tear and sneezes and cavorts about like a dog lying uncomfortable on its bed. It is he who draws me in at night like a mass of wet lime into the depths of miserable humanity, where I nearly choke to death. When I awake in the morning I feel that Wondergood has infused ten more degrees of human into me⁠—Think of it: He may soon eject me all together and leave me standing outside⁠—he, the miserable owner of an empty barn into which I brought breath and soul!</p>
				<p>Like a hurried thief I crawled into a stranger’s clothes, the pockets of which are bulging with forged promissory notes⁠—no, still worse!</p>
				<p>It is not only uncomfortable attire. It is a low, dark and stifling jail, wherein I occupy less space than a ring might in the stomach of Wondergood. You, my dear reader, have been hidden in your prison from childhood and you even seem to like it, but I⁠—I come from the kingdom of liberty. And I refuse to be Wondergood’s tape worm: one swallow of poison and I am free again. What will you say then, scoundrel Wondergood? Without me you will be devoured by the worms. You will crack open at the seams⁠—Miserable carcass! touch me not!</p>
				<p>On this night however I was in the absolute power of Wondergood. What is human blood to Me? What do I care about the troubles of <em>their</em> life! But Wondergood was quite aroused by the crazy Magnus. Suddenly I felt⁠—just think of it⁠—! That I am filled with blood, like the bladder of an ox, and the bladder is very thin and weak, so that it would be dangerous to prick it. Prick it and out spurts the blood! I was terrified at the idea that I might be killed in this house: That someone might cut my throat and turning me upside down, hanging by the legs, would let the blood run out upon the floor.</p>
				<p>I lay in the darkness and strained my ears to hear whether or not Magnus was approaching with his white hands. And the greater the silence in this cursed house the more terrified I grew. Even Toppi failed to snore as usual. This made me angry. Then my body began to ache. Perhaps I was injured in the wreck, or was it weariness brought on by the flight? Then my body began to itch in the most ordinary way and I even began to move the feet: it was the appearance of the jovial clown in the tragedy!</p>
				<p>Suddenly a dream seized Me by the feet and dragged me rapidly below. I hardly had time enough to shout. And what nonsense arose before me! Do you ever have such dreams? I felt that I was a bottle of champagne, with a thin neck and sealed, but filled not with wine but with blood! And it seemed that not only I but all people had become bottles with sealed tops and all of us were arranged in a row on a seashore. And, Someone horrible was approaching from Somewhere and wanted to smash us all. And I saw how foolish it would be to do so and wanted to shout: “Don’t smash them. Get a corkscrew!” But I had no voice. I was a bottle. Suddenly the dead lackey George approached. In his hands was a huge sharp corkscrew. He said something and seized me by the throat⁠—Ah, ah, by the throat!⁠—</p>
				<p>I awoke in pain. Apparently he did try to open me up. My wrath was so great that I neither sighed nor smiled nor moved. I simply killed Wondergood again. I gnashed my teeth, straightened out my eyes, closed them calmly, stretched out at full length and lay peacefully in the full consciousness of the greatness of my Ego. Had the ocean itself moved up on me I would not have batted an eye! Get thee hence, my friend, I wish to be alone.</p>
				<p>And the body grew silent, colorless, airy and empty again. With light step I left it and before my eyes there arose a vision of the <em>extraordinary</em>, that which cannot be expressed in your language, my poor friend! Satisfy your curiosity with the dream I have just confided to you and ask no more! Or does not the “huge, sharp corkscrew” suit you? But it is so⁠—artistic!</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>In the morning I was well again, refreshed and beautiful. I yearned for the play, like an actor who has just left his dressing room. Of course I did not forget to shave. This canaille Wondergood gets overgrown with hair as quickly as his golden skinned pigs. I complained about this to Toppi with whom, while waiting for Magnus, I was walking in the garden. And Toppi, thinking a while, replied philosophically:</p>
				<p>“Yes, man sleeps and his beard grows. This is as it should be⁠—for the barbers!”</p>
				<p>Magnus appeared. He was no more hospitable than yesterday and his pale face carried unmistakable indications of weariness. But he was calm and polite. How black his beard is in the daytime! He pressed my hand in cold politeness and said: (we were perched on a wall.)</p>
				<p>“You are enjoying the Roman Campagna, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood? A magnificent sight! It is said that the Campagna is noted for its fevers, but there is but one fever it produces in me⁠—the fever of thought!”</p>
				<p>Apparently Wondergood did not have much of a liking for nature, and I have not yet managed to develop a taste for earthly landscape: an empty field for me. I cast my eyes politely over the countryside before us and said:</p>
				<p>“People interest me more, Signor Magnus.”</p>
				<p>He gazed at me intently with his dark eyes and lowering his voice said dryly and with apparent reluctance:</p>
				<p>“Just two words about people, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. You will soon see my daughter, Maria. She is my three billions. You understand?”</p>
				<p>I nodded my head in approval.</p>
				<p>“But your California does not produce such gold. Neither does any other country on this dirty earth. It is the gold of the heavens. I am not a believer, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, but even I experience some doubts when I meet the gaze of my Maria. Hers are the only hands into which you might without the slightest misgiving place your billions⁠—”</p>
				<p>I am an old bachelor and I was overcome with fear, but Magnus continued sternly with a ring of triumph in his voice:</p>
				<p>“But she will not accept them, Sir! Her gentle hands must never touch this golden dirt. Her clean eyes will never behold any sight but that of this endless, godless Campagna. Here is her monastery, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, and there is but one exit for her from here: into the Kingdom of Heaven, if it does exist!”</p>
				<p>“I beg your pardon but I cannot understand this, my dear Magnus!” I protested in great joy. “Life and people⁠—”</p>
				<p>The face of Thomas Magnus grew angry, as it did yesterday, and in stern ridicule, he interrupted me:</p>
				<p>“And I beg you to grasp, <em>dear</em> Wondergood, that life and people are not for Maria. It is enough that I know them. My duty was to <em>warn</em> you. And now”⁠—he again assumed the attitude of cold politeness⁠—“I ask you to come to my table. You too, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toppi!”</p>
				<p>We had begun to eat, and were chattering of small matters, when <em>Maria</em> entered. The door through which she entered was behind my back. I mistook her soft step for those of the maid carrying the dishes, but I was astonished by the long-nosed Toppi, sitting opposite me. His eyes grew round like circles, his face red, as if he were choking. His Adam’s apple seemed to be lifted above his neck as if driven by a wave, and to disappear again somewhere behind his narrow, ministerial collar. Of course, I thought he was choking to death with a fishbone and shouted:</p>
				<p>“Toppi! What is the matter with you? Take some water.”</p>
				<p>But Magnus was already on his feet, announcing coldly:</p>
				<p>“My daughter, Maria. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Henry Wondergood!”</p>
				<p>I turned about quickly and⁠—how can I express the extraordinary when it is inexpressible? It was something more than beautiful. It was terrible in its beauty. I do not want to seek comparisons. I shall leave that to you. Take all that you have ever seen or ever known of the beautiful on earth: the lily, the stars, the sun, but add, add still more. But not this was the awful aspect of it: There was something else: the elusive yet astonishing similarity⁠—to whom? Whom have I met upon this earth who was so beautiful⁠—so beautiful and awe-inspiring⁠—awe-inspiring and unapproachable. I have learned by this time your entire archive, Wondergood, and I do not believe that it comes from your modest gallery!</p>
				<p>“Madonna!” mumbled Toppi in a hoarse voice, scared out of his wits.</p>
				<p>So that is it! Yes, Madonna. The fool was right, and I, Satan, could understand his terror. Madonna, whom people see only in churches, in paintings, in the imagination of artists. Maria, the name which rings only in hymns and prayer books, heavenly beauty, mercy, forgiveness and love! Star of the Seas! Do you like that name: Star of the Seas?</p>
				<p>It was really devilishly funny. I made a deep bow and almost blurted out:</p>
				<p>“Madam, I beg pardon for my unbidden intrusion, but I really did not expect to meet you <em>here</em>. I most humbly beg your pardon, but I could not imagine that this black bearded fellow has the honor of having you for his daughter. A thousand times I crave your pardon for⁠—”</p>
				<p>But enough. I said something else.</p>
				<p>“How do you do, Signorina. It is indeed a pleasure.”</p>
				<p>And she really did not indicate in any way that she was <em>already</em> acquainted with Me. One must respect an incognito if one would remain a gentleman and only a scoundrel would dare to tear a mask from a lady’s face! This would have been all the more impossible, because her father, Thomas Magnus, continued to urge us with a chuckle:</p>
				<p>“Do eat, please, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toppi. Why do you not drink, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood? The wine is splendid.”</p>
				<p>In the course of what followed:</p>
				<ol>
					<li>
						<p>She breathed⁠—</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>She blinked⁠—</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>She ate⁠—</p>
					</li>
				</ol>
				<p class="continued">and she was a beautiful girl, about eighteen years of age, and her dress was white and her throat bare. It was really laughable. I gazed at her bare neck and⁠—believe me, my earthly friend: I am not easily seduced, I am not a romantic youth, but I am not old by any means, I am not at all bad looking, I enjoy an independent position in the world and⁠—don’t you like the combination: Satan and <em>Maria</em>? <em>Maria</em> and Satan! In evidence of the seriousness of my intentions I can submit at that moment I thought more of <em>our</em> descendants and sought a name for <em>our</em> firstborn than indulged in frivolity.</p>
				<p>Suddenly Toppi’s Adam’s apple gave a jerk and he inquired hoarsely:</p>
				<p>“Has anyone ever painted your portrait, Signorina?”</p>
				<p>“Maria never poses for painters!” broke in Magnus sternly. I felt like laughing at the fool Toppi. I had already opened wide my mouth, filled with a set of first-class American teeth, when Maria’s pure gaze pierced my eyes and everything flew to the devil⁠—as in that moment of the railway catastrophe! You understand: she turned me inside out, like a stocking⁠—or how shall I put it? My fine Parisian costume was driven inside of me and my still finer thoughts which, however, I would not have wanted to convey to the lady, suddenly appeared upon the surface. With all my secrecy I was left no more sealed than a room in a fifteen cent lodging house.</p>
				<p>But she <em>forgave</em> me, said nothing and threw her gaze like a projector in the direction of Toppi, illumining his entire body. You, too, would have laughed had you seen how this poor old devil was set aglow and aflame by this gaze⁠—clear from the prayer book to the fishbone with which he nearly choked to death.</p>
				<p>Fortunately for both of us Magnus arose and invited us to follow him into the garden.</p>
				<p>“Come, let us go into the garden,” said he. “Maria will show you her favorite flowers.”</p>
				<p>Yes, Maria! But seek no songs of praise from me, oh poet! I was mad! I was as provoked as a man whose closet has just been ransacked by a burglar. I wanted to gaze at Maria but was compelled to look upon the foolish flowers⁠—because I dared not lift my eyes. I am a gentleman and cannot appear before a lady without a necktie. I was seized by a curious humility. Do you like to feel humble? I do not.</p>
				<p>I do not know what Maria said. But I swear by eternal salvation⁠—her gaze, and her entire uncanny countenance was the embodiment of an all-embracing meaning so that any wise word I might have uttered would have sounded meaningless. The wisdom of words is necessary only for those poor in spirit. The right are silent. Take note of that, little poet, sage and eternal chatterbox, wherever you may be. Let it be sufficient for you that I have humbled myself to speak.</p>
				<p>Ah, but I have forgotten my humility! She walked and I and Toppi crawled after her. I detested myself and this broad-backed Toppi because of his hanging nose and large, pale ears. What was needed here was an Apollo and not a pair of ordinary Americans.</p>
				<p>We felt quite relieved when she had gone and we were left alone with Magnus. It was all so sweet and simple! Toppi abandoned his religious airs and I crossed my legs comfortably, lit a cigar, and fixed my steel-sharp gaze upon the whites of Magnus’s eyes.</p>
				<p>“You must be off to Rome, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. They are probably worrying about you,” said our host in a tone of loving concern.</p>
				<p>“I can send Toppi,” I replied. He smiled and added ironically:</p>
				<p>“I hardly think that would be sufficient, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood!”</p>
				<p>I sought to clasp his great white hand but it did not seem to move closer. But I caught it just the same, pressed it warmly and he was compelled to return the pressure!</p>
				<p>“Very well, Signor Magnus! I am off at once!” I said.</p>
				<p>“I have already sent for the carriage,” he replied. “Is not the Campagna beautiful in the morning?”</p>
				<p>I again took a polite look at the countryside and said with emotion:</p>
				<p>“Yes, it is beautiful! Irwin, my friend, leave us for a moment. I have a few words to say to Signor Magnus⁠—”</p>
				<p>Toppi left and Signor Magnus opened wide his big sad eyes. I again tried my steel on him, and bending forward closer to his dark face, I asked:</p>
				<p>“Have you ever observed <em>dear</em> Magnus, the very striking resemblance between your daughter, the Signorina Maria, and a certain⁠—celebrated personage? Don’t you think she resembles the Madonna?”</p>
				<p>“Madonna?” drawled out Magnus. “No, <em>dear</em> Wondergood, I haven’t noticed that. I never go to church. But I fear you will be late. The Roman fever⁠—”</p>
				<p>I again seized his white hand and shook it vigorously. No, I did not tear it off. And from my eyes there burst forth again <em>those</em> two tears:</p>
				<p>“Let us speak plainly, Signor Magnus,” said I. “I am a straightforward man and have grown to love you. Do you want to come along with me and be the lord of my billions?”</p>
				<p>Magnus was silent. His hand lay motionless in mine. His eyes were lowered and something dark seemed to pass over his face, then immediately to disappear. Finally he said, seriously and simply:</p>
				<p>“I understand you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood⁠—but I must refuse. No, I will not go with you. I have failed to tell you one thing, but your frankness and confidence in me compels me to say that I must, to a certain extent, steer clear of the police.”</p>
				<p>“The Roman police,” I asked, betraying a slight excitement. “Nonsense, we shall buy it.”</p>
				<p>“No, the international,” he replied. “I hope you do not think that I have committed some base crime. The trouble is not with police which can be bought. You are right, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, when you say that one can buy almost anyone. The truth is that I can be of no use to you. What do you want me for? You love humanity and I detest it. At best I am indifferent to it. Let it live and not interfere with me. Leave me my Maria, leave me the right and strength to detest people as I read the history of their life. Leave me my Campagna and that is all I want and all of which I am capable. All the oil within me has burned out, Wondergood. You see before you an extinguished lamp hanging on a wall, a lamp which once⁠—Goodbye.”</p>
				<p>“I do not ask your confidence, Magnus,” I interjected.</p>
				<p>“Pardon me, you will never receive it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. My name is an invention but it is the only one I can offer to my friends.”</p>
				<p>To tell the truth: I liked “Thomas Magnus” at that moment. He spoke bravely and simply. In his face one could read stubbornness and will. This man knew the value of human life and had the mien of one condemned to death. But it was the mien of a proud, uncompromising criminal, who will never accept the ministrations of a priest! For a moment I thought: My Father had many bastard children, deprived of legacy and wandering about the world. Perhaps Thomas Magnus is one of these wanderers? And is it possible that I have met a <em>brother</em> on this earth? Very interesting. But from a purely human, business point of view, one cannot help but respect a man whose hands are steeped in blood!</p>
				<p>I saluted, changed my position, and in the humblest possible manner, asked Magnus’s permission to visit him occasionally and seek his advice. He hesitated but finally looked me straight in the face and agreed.</p>
				<p>“Very well, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. You may come. I hope to hear from you things that may supplement the knowledge I glean from my books. And, by the way, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toppi has made an excellent impression upon my Maria”⁠—</p>
				<p>“Toppi?”</p>
				<p>“Yes. She has found a striking resemblance between him and one of her favorite saints. She goes to church frequently.”</p>
				<p>Toppi a saint! Or has his prayer book overbalanced his huge back and the fishbone in his throat. Magnus gazed at me almost gently and only his thin nose seemed to tremble slightly with restrained laughter.⁠—It is very pleasant to know that behind this austere exterior there is so much quiet and restrained merriment!</p>
				<p>It was twilight when we left. Magnus followed us to the threshold, but Maria remained in seclusion. The little white house surrounded by the cypress trees was as quiet and silent as we found it yesterday, but the silence was of a different character: the silence was the soul of Maria.</p>
				<p>I confess that I felt rather sad at this departure but very soon came a new series of impressions, which dispelled this feeling. We were approaching Rome. We entered the brightly illuminated, densely populated streets through some opening in the city wall and the first thing we saw in the Eternal City was a creaking trolley car, trying to make its way through the same hole in the wall. Toppi, who was acquainted with Rome, revelled in the familiar atmosphere of the churches we were passing and indicated with his long finger the <em>remnants</em> of ancient Rome which seemed to be clinging to the huge wall of the new structures: just as if the latter had been bombarded with the shells of old and fragments of the missiles had clung to the bricks.</p>
				<p>Here and there we came upon additional heaps of this old rubbish. Above a low parapet of stone, we observed a dark shallow ditch and a large triumphal gate, half sunk in the earth. “The Forum!” exclaimed Toppi, majestically. Our coachman nodded his head in affirmation. With every new pile of old stone and brick the fellow swelled with pride, while I longed for my New York and its skyscrapers, and tried to calculate the number of trucks that would be necessary to clear these heaps of rubbish called ancient Rome away before morning. When I mentioned this to Toppi he was insulted and replied:</p>
				<p>“You don’t understand anything: better close your eyes and just reflect that you are in Rome.”</p>
				<p>I did so and was again convinced that sight is as much of an impediment to the mind as sound: not without reason are all wise folk on the earth blind and all good musicians deaf.</p>
				<p>Like Toppi I began to sniff the air and through my sense of smell I gathered more of Rome and its horribly long and highly entertaining history than hitherto: thus a decaying leaf in the woods smells stronger than the young and green foliage. Will you believe me when I say that I sensed the odor of blood and Nero? But when I opened my eyes expectantly I observed a plain, everyday kiosk and a lemonade stand.</p>
				<p>“Well, how do you like it?” growled Toppi, still dissatisfied.</p>
				<p>“It smells⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Well, certainly it smells! It will smell stronger with every hour: these are old, strong aromas, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood.”</p>
				<p>And so it really was: the odor grew in strength. I cannot find comparisons to make it clear to you. All the sections of my brain began to move and buzz like bees aroused by smoke. It is strange, but it seems that Rome is included in the archive of the silly Wondergood. Perhaps this is his native town? When we approached a certain populous square I sensed the clear odor of some blood relatives, which was soon followed by the conviction that I, too, have walked these streets before. Have I, like Toppi, previously donned the human form? Ever louder buzzed the bees. My entire beehive buzzed and suddenly thousands of faces, dim and white, beautiful and horrible, began to dance before me; thousands upon thousands of voices, noises, cries, laughters and sighs nearly set me deaf. No, this was no longer a beehive: it was a huge, fiery smithy, where firearms were being forged with the red sparks flying all about. Iron!</p>
				<p>Of course, if I had lived in Rome before, I must have been one of its emperors: I <em>remember</em> the expression of my face. I remember the movement of my bare neck as I turn my head. I remember the touch of golden laurels upon my bald head⁠—Iron! Ah, I hear the steps of the iron legions of Rome. I hear the iron voices: “<i xml:lang="la">Vivat Caesar!</i>”</p>
				<p>I am hot. I am burning. Or was I not an emperor but simply one of the “victims” when Rome burned down in accordance with the magnificent plan of Nero? No, this is not a fire. This is a funeral pyre on which I am forcibly esconsced. I hear the snakelike hissing of the tongues of flame beneath my feet. I strain my neck, all lined with blue veins, and in my throat there rises the final curse⁠—or blessing? Think of it: I even remember that Roman face in the front row of spectators, which even then gave me no rest because of its idiotic expression and sleepy eyes: I am being burned and it sleeps!</p>
				<p>“Hotel ‘Internationale’ ”⁠—cried Toppi, and I opened my eyes.</p>
				<p>We were going up a hill along a quiet street, at the end of which there glowed a large structure, worthy even of New York: it was the hotel where we had previously wired for reservations. They probably thought we had perished in the wreck. My funeral pyre was extinguished. I grew as merry as a darkey who has just escaped from hard labor and I whispered to Toppi:</p>
				<p>“Well, Toppi, and how about the Madonna?”</p>
				<p>“Y-yes, interesting. I was frightened at first and nearly choked to death⁠—”</p>
				<p>“With a bone? You are silly, Toppi: she is polite and did not recognize you. She simply took you for one of her saints. It is a pity, old boy, that we have chosen for ourselves these solemn, American faces: had we looked around more carefully we might have found some more beautiful.”</p>
				<p>“I am quite satisfied with mine,” said Toppi sadly, and turned away. A glow of secret self-satisfaction appeared upon his long, shiny nose. Ah, Toppi, Ah, the saint!</p>
				<p>But we were already being accorded a triumphal reception.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="entry-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">February 14.<br/>
					Rome, Hotel “Internationale.”</p>
				</header>
				<p>I do not want to go to Magnus. I am thinking too much of his Madonna of flesh and bone. I have come here to lie and to play merrily and I am not at all taken by the prospect of being a mediocre actor, who weeps behind the scenes and appears on the stage with his eyes perfectly dry. Moreover, I have no time to gad about the fields catching butterflies with a net like a boy.</p>
				<p>The whole of Rome is buzzing about me. I am an extraordinary man, who loves his fellow beings and I am celebrated. The mobs who flock to worship Me are no less numerous than those who worship the Vicar of Christ himself, two Popes all at once.⁠—Yes, happy Rome cannot consider itself an orphan!</p>
				<p>I am now living at the hotel, where all is aquiver with ecstasy when I put my shoes outside my door for the night, but they are renovating a palace for me: the historic Villa Orsini. Painters, sculptors and poets are kept busy. One brush-pusher is already painting my portrait, assuring me that I remind him of one of the Medicis. The other brush-pushers are sharpening their knives for him.</p>
				<p>I ask him:</p>
				<p>“And can you paint a Madonna?”</p>
				<p>Certainly he can. It was he, if the signor recollects, who painted the famous Turk on the cigarette boxes, the Turk whose fame is known even in America. And now three brush-pushers are painting Madonnas for me. The rest are running about Rome seeking models. I said to one, in my barbarous, American ignorance of the higher arts:</p>
				<p>“But if you find such a model, Signor, just bring her to me. Why waste paint and canvas?”</p>
				<p>He was evidently pained and mumbled:</p>
				<p>“Ah, Signor⁠—a model?”</p>
				<p>I think he took me for a merchant in “live stock.” But, fool, why do I need your aid for which I must pay a commission, when my antechamber is filled with a flock of beauties? They all worship me. I remind them of Savanarola, and they seek to transform every dark corner in my drawing room, and every soft couch into a confessional. I am so glad that these society ladies, like the painters, know so well the history of their country and realize who I am.</p>
				<p>The joy of the Roman papers on finding that I did not perish in the wreck and lost neither my legs nor my billions, was equal to the joy of the papers of Jerusalem on the day of the resurrection of Christ⁠—in reality there was little cause for satisfaction on the part of the latter, as far as I am able to read history. I feared that I might remind the journalists of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Caesar, but fortunately they think little of the past and confined themselves to pointing out my resemblance to President Wilson. Scoundrels! They were simply flattering my American patriotism. To the majority, however, I recall a Prophet, but they do not know which one. On this point they are modestly silent. At any rate it is not Muhammad: my opposition to marriage is well known at all telegraph stations.</p>
				<p>It is difficult to imagine the filth on which I fed my hungry interviewers. Like an experienced swineherd, I gaze with horror on the mess they feed upon. They eat and yet they live. Although, I must admit, I do not see them growing fat! Yesterday morning I flew in an aeroplane over Rome and the Campagna. You will probably ask whether I saw Maria’s home? No. I did not find it: how can one find a grain of sand among a myriad of other grains⁠—But I really did not look for it: I felt horror-stricken at the great altitude.</p>
				<p>But my good interviewers, restless and impatient, were astounded by my coolness and courage. One fellow, strong, surly and bearded, who reminded me of Hannibal, was the first to reach me after the flight, and asked:</p>
				<p>“Did not the sensation of flying in the air, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, the feeling of having conquered the elements, thrill you with a sense of pride in man, who has subdued⁠—”</p>
				<p>He repeated the question: they don’t seem to trust me, somehow, and are always suggesting the proper answers. But I shrugged my shoulders and exclaimed sadly:</p>
				<p>“Can you imagine Signor⁠—No! Only once did I have a sense of pride in men and that was⁠—in the lavatory on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Atlantic</i>.”</p>
				<p>“Oh! In the lavatory! But what happened? A storm, and you were astounded by the genius of man, who has subdued⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Nothing extraordinary happened. But I was astounded by the genius of man who managed to create a palace out of such a disgusting necessity as a lavatory.”</p>
				<p>“Oh!”</p>
				<p>“A real temple, in which one is the arch priest!”</p>
				<p>“Permit me to make a note of that. It is such an original⁠—illumination of the problem⁠—”</p>
				<p>And today the whole Eternal City was feeding on this sally. Not only did they not request me to leave the place, but on the contrary, this was the day of the first official visits to my apartments: something on the order of a minister of state, an ambassador or some other palace chef came and poured sugar and cinnamon all over me as if I were a pudding. Later in the day I returned the visits: it is not very pleasant to keep such things.</p>
				<p>Need I say that I have a nephew? Every American millionaire has a nephew in Europe. My nephew’s name is also Wondergood. He is connected with some legation, is very correct in manners and his bald spot is so oiled that my kiss could serve me as a breakfast were I fond of scented oil. But one must be willing to sacrifice something, especially the gratification of a sense of smell. The kiss cost me not a cent, while it meant a great deal to the young man. It opened for him a wide credit on soap and perfumery.</p>
				<p>But enough! When I look at these ladies and gentlemen and reflect that they are just as they were at the court of Aschurbanipal and that for the past 2,000 years the pieces of silver received by Judas continue to bear interest, like his kiss⁠—I grow bored with this old and threadbare play. Ah, I want a great play. I seek originality and talent. I want beautiful lines and bold strokes. This company here casts me in the role of an old brass band conductor. At times I come to the conclusion that it wasn’t really worth my while to have undertaken such a long journey for the sake of this old drivel⁠—to exchange ancient, magnificent and multicolored Hell for its miserable replica. In truth, I am sorry that Magnus and his Madonna refused to join me⁠—we would have played a little⁠—just a little!</p>
				<p>I have had but one interesting morning. In fact I was quite excited. The congregation of a so-called “free” church, composed of very serious men and women, who insist upon worshipping in accordance with the dictates of their conscience, invited Me to deliver a Sunday sermon. I donned a black frock coat, which gave me a close resemblance to⁠—Toppi, went through a number of particularly expressive gestures before my mirror and was driven in an automobile, like a prophet⁠—moderne, to the service. I took as my subject or “text” Jesus’ advice to the rich youth to distribute his wealth among the poor⁠—and in not more than half an hour, I demonstrated as conclusively as 2 and 2 make 4, that love of one’s neighbor is the all important thing. Like a practical and careful American, however, I pointed out that it was not necessary to try and go after the whole of the kingdom of Heaven at one shot and to distribute one’s wealth carelessly; that one can buy it up in lots on the instalment plan and by easy payments. The faces of the faithful bore a look of extreme concentration. They were apparently figuring out something and came to the conclusion that on the basis I suggested, the Kingdom of Heaven was attainable for the pockets of all of them.</p>
				<p>Unfortunately, a number of my quick-witted compatriots were present in the congregation. One of them was about to rise to his feet to propose the formation of a stock company, when I realized the danger and frustrated this plan by letting loose a fountain of emotion, and thus extinguished his religiously practical zeal! What did I not talk about? I wept for my sad childhood, spent in labor and privation; I whined about my poor father who perished in a match factory. I prayed solemnly for all my brothers and sisters in Christ. The swamp I created was so huge that the journalists caught enough wild ducks to last them for six months. How we wept!</p>
				<p>I shivered with the dampness and began to beat energetically the drum of my billions: dumdum! Everything for others, not a cent for me: dumdum! With a brazenness worthy of the whip I concluded “with the words of the Great Teacher:”</p>
				<p>“Come ye unto me all who are heavy-laden and weary and I will comfort ye!”</p>
				<p>Ah, what a pity I cannot perform miracles! A little practical miracle, something on the order of transforming a bottle of water into one of sour Chianti or some of the worshippers into pastry, would have gone a long way at that moment.⁠—You laugh and are angry, my earthy reader? There is no reason for you to act thus. Remember only that the <em>extraordinary</em> cannot be expressed in your ventriloquist language and that my words are merely a cursed mask for my thoughts.</p>
				<p>Maria!</p>
				<p>You will read of my success in the newspapers. There was one fool, however, who almost spoiled my day for me: he was a member of the Salvation Army. He came to see me and suggested that I immediately take up a trumpet and lead the army into battle⁠—they were too cheap laurels he offered and I drove him out. But Toppi⁠—he was triumphantly silent all the way home and finally he said very respectfully:</p>
				<p>“You were in fine mettle today, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. I even wept. It is a pity that neither Magnus nor his daughter heard you preach. She⁠—she would have changed her opinion of us.”</p>
				<p>You understand, of course, that I felt like kicking this admirer out of the carriage! I again felt in the pupils of my eyes the piercing sting of hers. The speed with which I was again turned inside out and spread out on a plate for the public’s view is equal only to that with which an experienced waiter opens a can of conserves. I drew my top hat over my eyes, raised the collar of my coat and looking very much like a tragedian just hissed off the stage, I rode silently, and without acknowledging the greetings showered upon me, I proceeded to my apartments. Ah, that gaze of Maria! And how could I have acknowledged the greetings when I had no cane with me?</p>
				<p>I have declined all of today’s invitations and am at home: I am engaged in “religious meditation”⁠—this was how Toppi announced it to the journalists. He has really begun to respect me. Before me are whiskey and champagne. I am slowly filling up on the liquor while from the dining hall below come the distant strains of music. My Wondergood was apparently considerable of a drunkard and every night he drags me to the wineshop, to which I interpose no objection. What’s the difference? Fortunately his intoxication is of a merry kind and we make quite a pleasant time of it. At first we cast our dull eyes over the furniture and involuntarily begin to calculate the value of all this bronze, these carpets, Venetian mirrors, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				<p>“A trifle!” we agree, and with peculiar self-satisfaction we lose ourselves in the contemplation of our own billions, of our power and our remarkable wisdom and character. Our bliss increases with each additional glass. With peculiar pleasure we wallow in the cheap luxury of the hotel, and⁠—think of it!⁠—I am actually beginning to have a liking for bronze, carpets, glass and stones. My Puritan Toppi condemns luxury. It reminds him of Sodom and Gommorah. But it is difficult for me to part with these little emotional pleasures. How silly of me!</p>
				<p>We continue to listen dully and half-heartedly to the music and venture to whistle some accompaniments. We add a little contemplation on the decollete of the ladies and then, with our step still firm, we proceed to our resting room.</p>
				<p>But we were just ready for bed when suddenly I felt as if someone had struck me a blow and I was immediately seized with a tempest of tears, of love and sadness. The extraordinary suddenly found expression. I grew as broad as space, as deep as eternity and I embraced all in a single breath! But, oh, what sadness! Oh, what love, Maria!</p>
				<p>But I am nothing more than a subterranean lake in the belly of Wondergood and my storms in no way disturb his firm tread. I am only a solitaire in his stomach, of which he seeks to rid himself!</p>
				<p>We ring for the servants.</p>
				<p>“Soda!”</p>
				<p>I am simply drunk. <i xml:lang="it">Arrivederci, Signor, buona notte!</i></p>
			</section>
			<section id="entry-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">Rome, Hotel “Internationale.”</p>
				</header>
				<p>Yesterday I visited Magnus. I was compelled to wait long for him, in the garden, and when he did appear he was so cold and indifferent that I felt like leaving. I observed a few gray hairs in his black beard. I had not noticed them before. Was Maria unwell? I appeared concerned. Everything here is so uncertain that on leaving a person for one hour one may have to seek him in eternity.</p>
				<p>“Maria is well, thank you,” replied Magnus, frigidly. He seemed surprised as if my question were presumptuous and improper. “And how are your affairs, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood? The Roman papers are filled with news of you. You are scoring a big success.”</p>
				<p>With pain aggravated by the absence of Maria, I revealed to Magnus my disappointment and my ennui. I spoke well, not without wit and sarcasm. I grew more and more provoked by his lack of attention and interest, plainly written on his pale and weary face. Not once did he smile or venture to put any questions, but when I reached the story of my “nephew” he frowned in displeasure and said:</p>
				<p>“Fie! This is a cheap variety farce! How can you occupy yourself with such trifles, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”</p>
				<p>I replied angrily:</p>
				<p>“But it is not I who am occupying myself with them, Signor Magnus!”</p>
				<p>“And how about the interviews? What about that flight of yours? You should drive them away. This humbles your⁠ ⁠… three billions. And is it true that you delivered some sort of a sermon?”</p>
				<p>The joy of play forsook me. Unwilling as Magnus was to listen to me, I told him all about my sermon and those credulous fools who swallowed sacrilege as they do marmalade.</p>
				<p>“And did you expect anything different, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”</p>
				<p>“I expected that they would fall upon me with clubs for my audacity: When I sacrilegiously bandied about the words of the Testament.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Yes, they are beautiful words,” agreed Magnus. “But didn’t you know that all their worship of God and all their faith are nothing but sacrilege? When they term a wafer the body of Christ, while some Sixtus or Pius reigns undisturbed, and with the approval of all Catholics as the Vicar of Christ, why should not you, an American from Illinois, call yourself at least⁠ ⁠… his governor? This is not meant as sacrilege, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. These are simply allegories, highly convenient for blockheads, and you are only wasting your wrath. But when will you get down to <em>business</em>?”</p>
				<p>I threw up my hands in skillfully simulated sorrow:</p>
				<p>“I <em>want</em> to do something, but I <em>know</em> not what to do. I shall probably never get down to business until you, Magnus, agree to come to my aid.”</p>
				<p>He frowned, at his own large, motionless, white hands and then at me:</p>
				<p>“You are too credulous, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. This is a great fault when one has three billions. No, I am of no use to you. Our roads are far apart.”</p>
				<p>“But, dear Magnus!⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>I expected him to strike me for this gentle <em>dear</em>, which I uttered in my best possible falsetto. But I ventured to continue. With all the sweetness I managed to accumulate in Rome, I looked upon the dim physiognomy of my friend and in a still gentler falsetto, I asked:</p>
				<p>“And of what nationality are you, my <em>dear</em>⁠ ⁠… Signor Magnus? I suspect for some reason that you are not Italian?”</p>
				<p>He replied calmly:</p>
				<p>“No, I am not Italian.”</p>
				<p>“But where is your country?⁠—”</p>
				<p>“My country?⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="la">Omne solum liberam libero patria.</i> I suppose you do not know Latin? It means: Where freedom is there is the fatherland of every free man. Will you take breakfast with me?”</p>
				<p>The invitation was couched in such icy tones and Maria’s absence was so strongly implied therein that I was compelled to decline it politely. The devil take this man! I was not at all in a merry mood that morning. I fervently wished to weep upon his breast while he mercilessly threw cold showers upon my noblest transports. I sighed and changed my pose. I assumed a pose prepared especially for Maria. Speaking in a low voice, I said:</p>
				<p>“I want to be frank with you, Signor Magnus. My past⁠ ⁠… contains many dark pages, which I should like to redeem. I.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He quickly interrupted me:</p>
				<p>“There are dark pages in everybody’s past, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. I myself am not so clear of reproach as to accept the confession of such a worthy gentleman.”</p>
				<p>“I am a poor spiritual father,” he added with a most unpleasant laugh: “<em>I never pardon sinners</em> and, in view of that, what pleasure could there be for you in your confession. Better tell me something more about your nephew. Is he young?”</p>
				<p>We spoke about my nephew⁠—and Magnus smiled. A pause ensued. Then Magnus asked whether I had visited the Vatican gallery and I bade him goodbye, requesting him to transmit my compliments to Maria. I confess I was a sorry sight and felt deeply indebted to Magnus when he said in bidding me farewell:</p>
				<p>“Do not be angry with me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. I am not altogether well today and⁠ ⁠… am rather worried about my affairs. That’s all. I hope to be more pleasant when we meet again, but be so kind as to excuse me this morning. I shall see that Maria gets your compliments.”</p>
				<p>If this blackbearded fellow were only <em>playing</em>, I confess I would have found a worthy partner.</p>
				<p>A dozen pickaninnies could not have licked off the honeyed expression my face assumed at Magnus’ promise to transmit my greetings to Maria. All the way back to my hotel I smiled idiotically at the coachman’s back and afterwards bestowed a kiss on Toppi’s brow⁠—the canaille still maintains an odor of fur, like a young devil.</p>
				<p>“I see there was profit in your visit,” said Toppi significantly. “How is Magnus’⁠ ⁠… daughter? You understand?”</p>
				<p>“Splendid, Toppi, splendid! She said that my beauty and wisdom reminded her of Solomon’s!”</p>
				<p>Toppi smiled condescendingly at my unsuccessful jest. The honeyed expression left my face and rust and vinegar took the place of the sugar. I locked myself in my room and for a long time continued to curse Satan for falling in love with a woman.</p>
				<p>You consider yourself original, my earthly friend, when you fall in love with a woman and begin to quiver all over with the fever of love. And I do not. I can see the legions of couples, from Adam and Eve on; I can see their kisses and caresses; I can hear the words so cursedly monotonous, and I begin to detest my own lips daring to mumble the mumbling of others, my eyes, simulating the gaze of others, my heart, surrendering obediently to the click of the lock of a house of shame. I can see all these excited animals in their groaning and their caresses and I cry with revulsion at my own mass of bones and flesh and nerves! Take care, Satan in human form, Deceit is coming over You!</p>
				<p>Won’t you take Maria for yourself, my earthly friend? Take her. She is yours, not mine. Ah, if Maria were my slave, I would put a rope around her neck and would take her, naked, to the market place: Who will buy? Who will pay the most for this unearthly beauty? Ah, do not hurt the poor blind merchant: open wide your purses, jingle louder your gold, generous gentlemen!⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>What, she will not go? Fear not, Signor, she will come and she will love you.⁠ ⁠… This is simply her maidenly modesty, Sir! Shall I tie the other end of the rope about her and lead her to your bed, kind sir? Take the rope along with you. I charge nothing for that. Only rid me of this heavenly beauty! She has the face of the radiant Madonna. She is the daughter of the honorable Thomas Magnus and both of them are thieves: he stole his white hands and she⁠—her pristine face! Ah.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>But I am beginning to play with you, dear reader? That is a mistake: I have simply taken the wrong note book. No, it is not a mistake. It is worse. I play because my loneliness is very great, very deep⁠—I fear it has no bottom at all! I stand on the edge of an abyss and hurl words, many heavy words, into it, but they fall without a sound. I hurl into it laughter, threats and moans. I spit into it. I fling into it heaps of stones and rocks. I throw mountains into it⁠—and still it remains silent and empty. No, really, there is no bottom to this abyss and we toil in vain, you and I, my friend!</p>
				<p>… But I see your smile and your cunning laugh: you <em>understand</em> why I spoke so sourly of loneliness.⁠ ⁠… Ah, ’tis love! And you want to ask whether I have a mistress?</p>
				<p>Yes: there are two. One is a Russian countess. The other, an Italian countess. They differ only in the kind of perfume they use. But this is such an immaterial matter that I love them both equally.</p>
				<p>You probably wish to ask also whether I shall ever visit Magnus again?</p>
				<p>Yes, I shall go to Magnus. I love him very much. It matters little that his name is false and that his daughter has the audacity to resemble the Madonna. I haven’t enough of Wondergood in me to be particular about a name⁠—and I am too <em>human</em> not to forgive the efforts of others to appear <em>divine</em>.</p>
				<p>I swear by eternal salvation that the one is worthy of the other!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="entry-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">February 21, 1914.<br/>
					Rome, Villa Orsini.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Cardinal <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">X.</abbr>, the closest friend and confidante of the Pope, has paid me a visit. He was accompanied by two abbés. In general, he is a personage whose attentions to me have brought me no small measure of prestige.</p>
				<p>I met His Eminence in the reception hall of my new palace. Toppi was dancing all about the priests, snatching their blessings quicker than a lover does the kisses of his mistress. Six devout hands hardly managed to handle one Devil, grown pious, and before we had reached the threshold of my study, he actually contrived to touch the belly of the Cardinal. What ecstasy!</p>
				<p>Cardinal <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">X.</abbr> speaks all the European languages and, out of respect for the Stars and Stripes and my billions, he spoke English. He began the conversation by congratulating me upon the acquisition of the Villa Orsini and told me its history in detail for the past 200 years. This was quite unexpected, very long, at times confusing and unintelligible, so that I was compelled, like a real American ass, to blink constantly⁠ ⁠… but this gave me an opportunity to study my distinguished and eminent visitor.</p>
				<p>He is not at all old. He is broad shouldered, well built and in good health. He has a large, almost square face, an olive skin, with a bluish tinge upon his shaven cheeks, and his thin, but beautiful hands reveal his Spanish blood. Before he dedicated himself to God, Cardinal <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">X.</abbr> was a Spanish grandee and duke. But his dark eyes are too small and too deeply set beneath his thick eyebrows and the distance between the short nose and the thin lips is too long.⁠ ⁠… All this reminds me of someone. But of whom? And what is this curious habit I have of being reminded of someone? Probably a saint?</p>
				<p>For a moment the cardinal was lost in thought and suddenly I recalled: Yes, this is simply a shaven <em>monkey</em>! This must be its sad, boundless pensiveness, <em>its</em> evil gleam within the narrow pupil!</p>
				<p>But in a moment the Cardinal laughed, jested and gesticulated like a Neapolitan lazzarone⁠—he was no longer telling me the history of the palace. He was playing, he was interpreting it in facial expression and dramatic monologue! He has short fingers, not at all like those of a monkey, and when he gesticulates he rather resembles a penguin while his voice reminds me of a talking parrot⁠—Who are you, anyhow?</p>
				<p>No, a monkey! He is laughing again and I observe that he really does not know how to laugh. It is as if he had learned the human art of laughter but yesterday. He likes it but experiences considerable difficulty in extracting it from his throat. The sounds seem to choke him. It is impossible not to echo this strange contagious laughter. But it seems to break one’s jaws and teeth and to petrify the muscles.</p>
				<p>It was really remarkable. I was fascinated when Cardinal <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">X.</abbr> suddenly cut short his lecture on the Villa Orsini by a fit of groaning laughter which left him calm and silent. His thin fingers played with his rosary, he remained quiet and gazed at me with a mien of deepest reverence and gentle love: something akin to tears glistened in his dark eyes. I had made an impression upon him. He loved me!</p>
				<p>What was I to do? I gazed into his square, apelike face. Kindliness turned to love, love into passion, and still we maintained the silence⁠ ⁠… another moment and I would have stifled him in my embrace!</p>
				<p>“Well, here you are in Rome, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood,” sweetly sang the old monkey, without altering his loving gaze.</p>
				<p>“Here I am in Rome,” I agreed obediently, continuing to gaze upon him with the same sinful passion.</p>
				<p>“And do you know, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, why I came here, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, in addition, of course, to the pleasure I anticipated in making your acquaintance?”</p>
				<p>I thought and with my gaze unchanged, replied:</p>
				<p>“For money, Your Eminence?”</p>
				<p>The Cardinal shook, as though flapping his wings, laughed, and slapped his knee⁠—and again lost himself in loving contemplation of my nose. This dumb reverence, to which I replied with redoubled zest, began to wield a peculiar influence upon me. I purposely tell you all this in detail in order that you may understand my wish at that moment: to begin cavorting about, to sing like a cock, to tell my best Arkansas anecdote, or simply to invite His Eminence to remove his regalia and play a game of poker!</p>
				<p>“Your Eminence.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“I love Americans, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood.”</p>
				<p>“Your Eminence! In Arkansas they tell a story.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Ah, I see, you want to get down to business? I understand your impatience. Money matters should never be postponed. Is that not so?”</p>
				<p>“It depends entirely upon one’s concern in these matters, Your Eminence.”</p>
				<p>The square face of the Cardinal grew serious, and in his eyes there gleamed for a moment a ray of loving reproach:</p>
				<p>“I hope you are not vexed at my long dissertation, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. I love so much the history of our great city that I could not forego the pleasure⁠ ⁠… the things you see before you are not Rome. There is no Rome, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. Once upon a time it was the Eternal City, but today it is simply a large city and the greater it grows the further it is from eternity. Where is that great Spirit which once illumined it?”</p>
				<p>I shall not narrate to you all the prattle of this purple parrot, his gently-cannibal look, his grimaces and his laughter. All that the old shaven monkey told me when it finally grew weary was:</p>
				<p>“Your misfortune is that you love your fellow beings too much.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Love your neighbor.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Well, let neighbors love each other. Go on teaching that but why do <em>you</em> want to do it? When one loves too well one is blind to the shortcomings of the beloved and still worse: one elevates these faults to virtues. How can you reform people and make them happy without realizing their shortcomings or by ignoring their vices? When one loves, one pities and pity is the death of power. You see, I am quite frank with you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, and I repeat: love is weakness. Love will get the money out of your pocket and will squander it⁠ ⁠… on rouge! Leave love to the lower classes. Let them love each other. Demand it of them, but you, you have risen to greater heights, gifted with such power!⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“But what can I do, Your Eminence? I am at a loss to understand it all. From my childhood on, especially in church, I have had it drummed into me that one must love his neighbor, and I believed it. And so.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>The Cardinal grew pensive. Like laughter, pensiveness was becoming to him and rendered his square face immovable, filling it with dignity and lonely grief. Leaning forward with his lips compressed and supporting his chin upon his hand, he fixed his sharp, sleepy eyes upon me. There was much sorrow in them. He seemed to be waiting for the conclusion of my remark, and not having patience to do so, sighed and blinked.</p>
				<p>“Childhood, yes”⁠ ⁠… he mumbled, still blinking sorrowfully. “Children, yes. But you are no longer a child. Forget this lesson. You must acquire the heavenly gift of forgetfulness, you know.”</p>
				<p>He gnashed his white teeth and significantly scratched his nose with his thin finger, continuing seriously:</p>
				<p>“But it’s all the same, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. You, yourself cannot accomplish much.⁠ ⁠… Yes, yes! One must <em>know</em> people to make them happy. Isn’t that your noble aim? But the Church alone <em>knows</em> people. She has been a mother and teacher for thousands of years. Her <em>experience</em> is the only one worth while, and, I may say, the only reliable one. As far as I know your career, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, you are an experienced cattle man. And you know, of course, what <em>experience</em> means even in the matter of handling such simple creatures as.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“As swine.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He was startled⁠—and suddenly began to bark, to cough, to whine: he was laughing again.</p>
				<p>“Swine? that’s fine, that’s splendid, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, but do not forget that one finds the devil, too, in swine!”</p>
				<p>Ceasing his laughter he proceeded:</p>
				<p>“In teaching others, we learn ourselves. I do not contend that all the methods of education and training employed by the Church were equally successful. No, we often made mistakes, but every one of our mistakes served to improve our methods⁠ ⁠… we are approaching perfection, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, we are approaching perfection!”</p>
				<p>I hinted at the rapid growth of rationalism which, it seemed to me, threatened to destroy the “perfection” of the Church, but Cardinal <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">X.</abbr> again flapped his wings and almost screeched with laughter.</p>
				<p>“Rationalism! You are a most talented humorist, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood! Tell me, was not the celebrated Mark Twain a countryman of yours? Yes, yes! Rationalism! Just think a moment. From what root is this word derived and what does it mean⁠—<em>ratio</em>? <i xml:lang="la">An nescis, mi filis quantilla sapientia rigitur orbis?</i> Ah, my dear Wondergood! To speak of ratio on this earth is more out of place than it would be to speak of a rope in the home of a man who has just been hanged!”</p>
				<p>I watched the old monkey enjoying himself and I enjoyed myself too. I studied this mixture of a monkey, parrot, penguin, fox, wolf⁠—and whatnot? And it was really funny: I love merry suicides. For a long time we continued our fun at the expense of <em>ratio</em> until His Eminence calmed himself and assumed the tone of a teacher:</p>
				<p>“As antisemitism is the Socialism of fools.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“And are you familiar⁠ ⁠… ?”</p>
				<p>“I told you we are approaching perfection!⁠ ⁠… So is rationalism the wisdom of fools. The wise man goes further. The ratio constitutes the holiday dress of a fool. It is the coat he dons in the presence of others, but he really lives, sleeps, works, loves and dies without any ratio at all. Do you fear death, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”</p>
				<p>I did not feel like replying and remained silent.</p>
				<p>“You need not feel ashamed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood: one should fear death. As long as there is <em>death</em>.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>The features of the monkey’s face suddenly contracted and in his eyes there appeared horror and wrath: as if someone had seized him by the back of his neck and thrust him into the darkness and terror of a primeval forest. He <em>feared</em> death and his terror was dark, evil and boundless. I needed no words of explanation and no other evidence: One look upon this distorted, befogged and confused <em>human</em> face was sufficient to compel reverence for the Great Irrational! And how weak is <em>their</em> steadiness: My Wondergood also grew pale and cringed⁠ ⁠… ah, the rogue! He was <em>now</em> seeking protection and help from Me!</p>
				<p>“Will you have some wine, Your Eminence?”</p>
				<p>But His Eminence was himself again. He curved his thin lips into a smile and shook his head in the negative. And suddenly he broke out again with surprising fury:</p>
				<p>“And as long as there is death, the Church is unshakable! Let all of you who seek to undermine her, tear her, and blow her up⁠—you cannot conquer her. And even if you should succeed in destroying her, the first to perish beneath her ruins would be yourselves. Who will then defend you against death? Who will give you sweet faith in immortality, in eternal life, in everlasting bliss?⁠ ⁠… Believe me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, the world is not seeking your ratio. It is all a misunderstanding!”</p>
				<p>“But what does it seek, Your Eminence?”</p>
				<p>“What does it want? <i xml:lang="la">Mundus vult decipi</i>⁠ ⁠… you know our Latin? the world wants to be fooled!”</p>
				<p>And the old monkey again grew merry, begun to wink, to beam with satisfaction, slapped his knee and burst into laughter. I also laughed. The rascal was so funny!</p>
				<p>“And is it you,” said I, “who wants to fool it?”</p>
				<p>The Cardinal again grew serious and replied sadly:</p>
				<p>“The Holy See needs funds, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. The world, while it has not grown rational, has become weaker in its faith and it is somewhat difficult to manage it.”</p>
				<p>He signed and continued:</p>
				<p>“You are not a Socialist, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood? Ah, do not be ashamed. We are all Socialists now. We are all on the side of the hungry: the more satisfied they will be, the more they will fear <em>death</em>. You understand?”</p>
				<p>He flung out his arms and drew them in again, like a net filled with fish and said:</p>
				<p>“We are fishermen, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, humble fishermen!⁠ ⁠… And tell me: do you regard the desire for <em>liberty</em> as a virtue or a vice?”</p>
				<p>“The entire civilized world regards the desire for liberty as a virtue,” I replied angrily.</p>
				<p>“I expected no other reply from a citizen of the United States. But don’t you personally believe that he who will give man limitless <em>freedom</em> will also bring him <em>death</em>? <em>Death</em> alone releases all earthly ties. And don’t you regard the words ‘freedom’ and ‘death’ as synonymous?”</p>
				<p>“I speak of political liberty.”</p>
				<p>“Of political liberty? Oh, we have no objection to that. You can have as much as you please of that! Of course, provided men themselves ask for it. Are you sure they really want it? If they do, please help yourself! It is all nonsense and calumny to say that the Holy See is in favor of reaction.⁠ ⁠… I had the honor to be present on the balcony of the Vatican when His Holiness blessed the first French aëroplane that appeared over Rome, and the next Pope, I am sure, will gladly bless the barricades. The time of Galileo has passed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, and we all know now that the earth does move!”</p>
				<p>He drew a circle in the air with his finger, indicating the revolution of the earth.</p>
				<p>I said:</p>
				<p>“You must permit me to think over your proposal, Your Eminence.”</p>
				<p>Cardinal <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">X.</abbr> jumped up from his chair and gently touched my shoulder with two of his aristocratic fingers:</p>
				<p>“Oh, I am not hurrying you, my good <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. It was you who were hurrying me. I am even convinced that you will at first refuse me, but when, after some little experience, you will have realized the real <em>needs</em> of man.⁠ ⁠… I, too, love man, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, to be sure, not so passionately and.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He departed with the same grimaces, bearing himself with dignity and dispensing blessings all about him. I saw him again through the window at the entrance of the palace, while the coachman was bringing up the carriage: he was speaking into the ear of one of his abbés, whose face resembled a black plate. The Cardinal’s countenance no longer reminded me of a monkey: it was rather the face of a shaven, hungry, tired lion. This able actor needed no dressing room for his makeup! Behind him stood a tall lackey, all dressed in black, reminding one of an English baronet. Whenever His Eminence turned about in his direction, he would respectfully lift his faded silk hat.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Following the departure of His Eminence I was surrounded by a merry group of friends, with whom I had filled the spare rooms of my palace for the purpose of alleviating my loneliness and ennui. Toppi looked proud and happy: he was so satiated with blessings that he fairly bulged. The artists, decorators and others⁠—whatever you call them⁠—were greatly impressed by the Cardinal’s visit, and spoke with much glee of the remarkable expression of his face and the grandeur of his manner! The Pope himself.⁠ ⁠… But when I remarked with the naivete of a Redskin that he reminded me of a monkey, the shrewd canailles burst into loud laughter and one of them immediately sketched a portrait of Cardinal <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">X.</abbr>⁠—in a cage. I am not a moralist to judge other people for their petty sins: they will get what is due them on their Judgment Day⁠—and I was much pleased by the cleverness of the laughing beasts. They do not appear to have much faith in <em>love</em> for one’s <em>fellow beings</em> and if I should rummage about among their drawings, I would probably find a pretty good sketch of the ass Wondergood. I like that. I find relief in communion with my little, pleasant sinners, from the babbling of the great and disagreeable saints⁠ ⁠… whose hands are covered with blood.</p>
				<p>Then Toppi asked me: “And how much does he want?”</p>
				<p>“He wants all!”</p>
				<p>Toppi said with determination:</p>
				<p>“Don’t you give him all. He promised to make me a prelate, but, all the same, don’t you give him all. One should save his money.”</p>
				<p>Every day I have unpleasant experiences with Toppi: people are constantly foisting counterfeit coin on him. When they first gave him some, he was greatly perturbed and was impressed with what I said to him.</p>
				<p>“You really astonish me, Toppi,” I said, “it is ridiculous for an old devil like you to accept counterfeit money from human beings, and allow yourself to be fooled. You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Toppi. I fear you will make a beggar of me.”</p>
				<p>Now, however, Toppi, entangled in the mesh of the counterfeit and the genuine, seeks to preserve both the one and the other: he is quite clever in money matters and the Cardinal tried in vain to bribe him. Toppi⁠—a prelate!⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>But the shaven monkey does really want my three billions. Apparently the belly of the Holy See is rumbling with hunger. I gazed long at the well executed caricature of the Cardinal and the longer I gazed, the less I liked it: no, there was something missing. The artist had sensed the ridiculous pretty well, but I do not see that fire of spite and malice which is in constant play beneath the gray ashes of terror. The bestial and the human is here, but it is not molded into that <em>extraordinary</em> mask which, now that a long distance separates me from the Cardinal and I no longer hear his heavy laughter, is beginning to exercise a most disagreeable influence over me. Or is it because the extraordinary is inexpressible through pencil?</p>
				<p>In reality he is a cheap rascal, no better than a plain pickpocket, and told me nothing new: he is human enough and wise enough to cultivate that contemptuous laughter of his at the expense of the rational. But he revealed <em>himself</em> to me and do not take offense at my American rudeness, dear reader: somewhere behind his broad shoulders, cringing with terror, there gleamed also your dear countenance. It was like a dream, you understand: it was as if someone were strangling you, and you, in stifled voice, cried to heaven: Murder! Police! Ah, you do not know that <em>third</em>, which is neither life nor death, and I know <em>who</em> it was that was strangling you with his bony fingers!</p>
				<p>But do I know? Oh, laugh at him who is laughing at you, comrade. I fear your turn is coming to have some fun at my expense. Do I know? I came to you from the innermost depths, merry and serene, blessed in the consciousness of my Immortality.⁠ ⁠… And I am already hesitating. I am already trembling before this shaven monkey’s face which dares to express its own low horror in such audaciously grand style: Ah, I have not even sold my Immortality: I have simply crushed it in my sleep, as does a foolish mother her newborn babe. It has simply faded beneath your sun and rains. It has become a transparent cloth without design, unfit to cover the nakedness of a respectable gentleman! This reeking Wondergood swamp in which I am submerged to my eyes, envelops me with mire, befogs my consciousness and stifles me with the unbearable odors of decay. When do you usually begin to decay, my friend: on the second, the third day or does it depend upon the climate? I am already in the process of decay, and I am nauseated by the odor of my entrails. Or are you so used to the work of the <em>worms</em> that you take it for the elevation of thought and inspiration?</p>
				<p>My God, I forgot that I may have some fair readers, too! I most humbly beg your pardon, worthy folk, for this uncalled for discussion of odors. I am a most unpleasant conversationalist, milady, and as a perfumer I am worse⁠ ⁠… no, still worse: I am a disgusting mixture of Satan and an American bear, and I know not how to appreciate your good taste.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>No, I am still Satan! I still know that I am immortal and when my will shall command me I will strangle myself with my own bony fingers. But if I <em>should forget</em>?</p>
				<p>Then I shall distribute my wealth among the poor and with you, my friend, shall crawl up to the old shaven monkey. I shall cling with my American face to his soft slipper, emitting blessings. I shall weep. I shall rave with horror: “Save me from Death!” And the old monkey, brushing the hair from his face, reclining comfortably, gleaming with a holy light, illuminating all about it⁠—and itself trembling with fear and horror⁠—will hastily continue to fool the world, the world which so loves to be fooled!</p>
				<p>But I am jesting. I wish to be serious now. I like Cardinal <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">X.</abbr> and I shall permit him to begild himself with my gold. I am weary. I must sleep. My bed and Wondergood await me. I shall extinguish the light and in the darkness I shall listen for a moment to the clicking of the counting machine within my breast. And then will come the great pianist, a drunken genius, and begin drumming upon the black keys of my brain. He knows everything and has forgotten everything, this ingenious drunkard, and confuses the most inspiring landscapes with a swamp.</p>
				<p>That is⁠—a dream.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
