<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<section id="entry-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">February 22.<br/>
					Rome, Villa Orsini.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Magnus was not at home. I was received by Maria.</p>
				<p>A glorious peace has suddenly descended upon me. In wondrous calm I breathe at this moment. Like a schooner, its sails lowered, I doze in the midday heat of the slumbering ocean. Not a stir. Not a ripple. I fear to move or to open wide my eyes, dazzled by the rays of the sun. I breathe silently, and I would not rouse the slightest wave upon the boundless smoothness of the sea. And quietly I lay down my pen.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="entry-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">February 23.<br/>
					Villa Orsini.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Thomas Magnus was not at home and, to my great surprise, I was received by Maria.</p>
				<p>I do not suppose you would be interested in how I greeted her and what I mumbled in the first few moments of our meeting. I can only say that I mumbled and that I felt a strong impulse to laugh. I could not lift my eyes to gaze upon Maria until my thoughts cast off their soiled garb and donned clean attire. As you see, I did not lose consciousness altogether! But in vain did I take these precautions: <em>that</em> torture did not follow. Maria’s gaze was clear and simple and it contained neither searching, penetrating fire nor fatal forgiveness. It was calm and clear, like the sky of the Campagna and⁠—I do not know how it happened⁠—it penetrated my entire being.</p>
				<p>She met me in the garden. We sat down by the gate, from which vantage point we had a good view of the Campagna. When you gaze at the Campagna you cannot prattle nonsense. No, it was she who gazed at the Campagna and I gazed into her eyes⁠—clear to the seventh sky, where you end the count of your heavens. We were silent or⁠—if you regard the following as conversation⁠—we spoke:</p>
				<p>“Are those mountains?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, those are the mountains of Albania. And there⁠—is Tivoli.”</p>
				<p>She picked out little white houses in the distance and pointed them out to me and I felt a peculiar calm and joy in Maria’s gaze. The suspicious resemblance of Maria to the Madonna no longer troubled me: how can I possibly be troubled by the fact that you resemble <em>yourself</em>? And came a moment when a great peace of mind descended upon <em>me</em>. I have no words of comparison whereby to reveal to you that great and bright calm. … I am forever conjuring up before me that accursed schooner with its lowered sails, on which I never really sailed, for I am afraid of seasickness! Or is it because on this night of my loneliness, my road is being illuminated by the <em>Star of the Seas</em>? Well, yes, I was a schooner, if you so desire it, and if this is not agreeable to you I was <em>All</em>. Besides I was <em>Nothing</em>. You see what nonsense emerges out of all this talk when Wondergood begins to seek words and comparisons.</p>
				<p>I was so calm that I even soon began to gaze into Maria’s eyes: I simply <em>believed</em> them. This is deeper than mere gazing. When necessary I shall find those eyes again. In the meantime I shall remain a schooner with sails lowered. I shall be <em>All</em> and I shall be <em>Nothing</em>. Only once did a slight breeze stir my sails, but only for a moment: that was when Maria pointed out the Tiberian road to me, cutting the green hills like a white thread, and asked whether I had ever traversed it before.</p>
				<p>“Yes, occasionally, Signorina.”</p>
				<p>“I often gaze upon this road and think that it must be extremely pleasant to traverse it by automobile.”</p>
				<p>“Have you a swift car, Signor?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes, Signorina, very swift! But those,” I continued in gentle reproach, “who are themselves limitless distances and endlessness are in no need of any movement.”</p>
				<p>Maria and an automobile! A winged angel entering a trolley car for the sake of speed! A swallow riding on a turtle! An arrow on the humpy back of a hod carrier! Ah, all comparisons lie: why speak of swallows and arrows, why speak of any movement for Maria, who embraces all distances! But it is only now that I thought of the trolley and the turtle. At that time I felt so calm and peaceful, I was deep in such bliss that I could think of nothing except that countenance of eternity and undying light!</p>
				<p>A great calm came upon Me on that day and nothing could disturb my endless bliss. It was not long before Thomas Magnus returned, and a flying fish, gleaming for a moment above the ocean, could no more disturb its blue smoothness than did Magnus disturb me. I <em>received</em> him into my heart. I swallowed him calmly and felt no heavier burden in my stomach than a whale does after swallowing a herring. It was gratifying to find Magnus hospitable and merry. He pressed my hand and his eyes were bright and kind. Even his face seemed less pale and not as weary as usual.</p>
				<p>I was invited to breakfast … lest it worry you, let me say right now that I remained until late in the evening. When Maria had retired I told Magnus of the visit of Cardinal <abbr class="name eoc">X.</abbr> His merry face darkened slightly and in his eyes appeared his former hostile flame.</p>
				<p>“Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr>? He <em>came</em> to see you?”</p>
				<p>I narrated to him in detail my conversation with “the shaven monkey,” and remarked that he had impressed me as a scoundrel of no small caliber. Magnus frowned and said sternly:</p>
				<p>“You laugh in vain, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. I have long known Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr> and … I have been keeping a close eye on him. He is evil, cruel and dangerous. Despite his ridiculous exterior, he is as cunning, merciless and revengeful as Satan!”</p>
				<p>And you, too, Magnus! Like Satan! This blue-faced, shaven orang-outang, this caressing gorilla, this monkey cavorting before a looking-glass! But I have exhausted my capacity for insult. Magnus’ remark fell like a stone to the bottom of my bliss. I listened further:</p>
				<p>“His flirting with the Socialists, his jokes at the expense of Galileo are all lies. Just as the enemies of Cromwell hanged him after his death, so would Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr> burn the bones of Galileo with immense satisfaction: to this day he regards the movement of the earth as a personal affront. It is an old school, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood; he will stop at nothing to overcome obstacles, be it poison or murder, which he will take care to attribute to the misfortune of accident. You smile but I cannot discuss the Vatican smilingly, not so long as it contains such … and it will always produce someone like Cardinal <abbr class="name eoc">X.</abbr> Look out, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood: You have landed within the sphere of his vision and interests, and, let me assure you, that scores of eyes are now watching you … perhaps me, too. Be on your guard, my friend!”</p>
				<p>Magnus was quite excited. Fervently I shook his hand:</p>
				<p>“Ah, Magnus! … But when will you agree to help me?”</p>
				<p>“But you know that I do not like human beings. It is <em>you</em> who loves them <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, not I.”</p>
				<p>A gleam of irony appeared in his eyes.</p>
				<p>“The Cardinal says that it is not at all necessary to love people in order to be happy. … The contrary, he says!”</p>
				<p>“And who told you that I want to make people happy? Again, it is <em>you</em> who wants to do that, not I. Hand over your billions to Cardinal <abbr class="name eoc">X.</abbr> His recipe for happiness is not worse than other patent medicines. To be sure, his recipe has one disadvantage: while dispensing <em>happiness</em> it destroys <em>people</em> … but is that important? You are too much of a business man, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, and I see that you are not sufficiently familiar with the world of our inventors of the Best Means for the Happiness of Mankind: These means are more numerous than the so-called best tonics for the growth of hair. I myself was a dreamer at one time and invented one or two in my youth … but I was short on chemistry and badly singed my hair in an explosion. I am very glad I did not come across your billions in <em>those</em> days. I am joking, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, but if you wish to be serious, here is my answer: keep on growing and multiplying your hogs, make four of your three billions, continue selling your conserves, provided they are not too rotten, and cease worrying about the happiness of Mankind. As long as the world likes good ham it will not deny you its love and admiration!”</p>
				<p>“And how about those who have no means to buy ham?”</p>
				<p>“What do you care about them? It is their belly⁠—pardon me for the expression⁠—that is rumbling with hunger, not yours. I congratulate you upon your new home: I know the Villa Orsini very well. It is a magnificent relic of Old Rome.”</p>
				<p>I balked at the prospect of another lecture on my palace! Yes, Magnus had again shoved me aside. He did it brusquely and roughly. But his voice lacked sternness and he gazed at me softly and kindly. Well, what of it? To the devil with humanity, its happiness and its ham! I shall try later to bore an entrance into Magnus’ brain. In the meantime leave me alone with my great peace and … Maria. Boundless peace and … Satan!⁠—isn’t that a splendid touch in my play? And what kind of a liar is he who can fool only others? To lie to oneself and believe it⁠—that is an art!</p>
				<p>After breakfast all <em>three</em> of us walked over the downy hills and slopes of the Campagna. It was still early Spring and only little white flowers gently brightened the young, green earth. A soft breeze diffused the scents of the season, while little houses gleamed in distant Albano. Maria walked in front of us, stopping now and then and casting her heavenly eyes upon everything they could envisage. When I return to Rome I shall order my brush-pusher to paint Madonna thus: On a carpet of soft green and little white flowers. Magnus was so frank and merry that I again drew his attention to Maria’s resemblance to the Madonna and told him of the miserable brush-pushers in search of a model. He laughed, agreed with me in my opinion of the aforementioned resemblance, and grew wistful.</p>
				<p>“It is a <em>fatal</em> resemblance, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. You remember that heavy moment when I spoke to you of <em>blood</em>? Already there is blood at the feet of Maria … the blood of one noble youth whose memory Maria and I cherish. There are fatal faces, there are fatal <em>resemblances</em> which confuse our souls and lead to the abyss of self destruction. I am the father of Maria, and yet I myself hardly dare to touch her brow with my lips. What insurmountable barriers does love raise for itself when it dares to lift its eyes upon Maria?”</p>
				<p>This was the only moment of that happy day when my ocean became overcast with heavy clouds, as tangled as the beard of “Mad King Lear,” while a wild wind shook the sails of my schooner. But I lifted my eyes to Maria, I met her gaze. It was bright and calm, like the sky above us⁠—and the wild wind disappeared without trace, bearing away with it fragments of the darkness. I do not know whether you understand these sea comparisons, which I consider quite inadequate. Let me explain: I again grew quite calm. What is that noble Roman youth to me, who himself unable to find <em>comparisons</em> was hurled over the head of his Pegasus? I am a white-winged schooner and beneath me is an entire ocean, and was it not written of Her: the <em>Incomparable</em>?</p>
				<p>The day was long and quiet and I was charmed with the precision with which the sun rolled down from its height to the rim of the earth, with the measured pace with which the stars covered the heavens, the large stars first, then the little ones, until the whole sky sparkled and gleamed. Slowly grew the darkness. Then came the rosy moon, at first somewhat rusty, then brilliant, and swam majestically over the road made free and warm by the sun. But more than anything else did I and Magnus feel charmed when we sat in the half-darkened room and heard Maria: she played the harp and sang.</p>
				<p>And listening to the strains of the harp I realized why man likes music produced by taut strings: I was myself a taut string and even when the finger no longer touched me, the sound continued to vibrate and died so slowly that I can still hear it in the depths of my soul. And suddenly I saw that the entire air was filled with taut and trembling strings: they extend from star to star, scatter themselves over the earth and penetrate my heart … like a network of telephone wires through a central station⁠—if you want more simple comparisons. And there was <em>something else</em> I understood when I heard <em>Maria’s</em> voice. …</p>
				<p>No, you are simply an animal, Wondergood! When I recall your loud complaints against love and its songs, cursed with the curse of monotony⁠—is that not your own expression?⁠—I feel like sending you off to a barn. You are a dull and dirty animal and I am ashamed that for a whole hour I listened to your silly bellowing. You may hold words in contempt, you may curse your embraces, but do not touch Love, my friend: only through love has it been given to you to obtain a glimpse into Eternity! Away, my friend! Leave Satan to himself, he who in the very blackest depths of man has suddenly come upon new and unexpected flames. Away! You must not see the <em>joy</em> and <em>astonishment</em> of Satan!</p>
				<p>The hour was late. The moon indicated midnight when I left Magnus and ordered the chauffeur to drive by way of the Numentinian road: I feared lest this great calm might slip away from me, and I wanted to overtake it in the depths of the Campagna. But the speed of the car broke the silence and I left my machine. It went to sleep at once beneath the light of the moon over its own shadow and looked like a huge, gray stone barring the road. For the last time its lights gleamed upon Me and it became transformed into something invisible. I was left alone with my shadow.</p>
				<p>We walked along the white road, I and my shadow, stopping occasionally and then again resuming our march. I sat down on a stone along the road and the black shadow hid behind my back. And here a great quiet descended upon the earth, upon the world. Upon my chilled brow I felt the cool touch of the moon’s kiss.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="entry-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">March 2.<br/>
					Rome, Villa Orsini.</p>
				</header>
				<p>I pass my days in deep solitude. My earthly existence is beginning to trouble me. With every hour I seem to <em>forget</em> what I have left behind the wall of <em>human</em> things. My <em>eyesight</em> is weakening. I can hardly see behind that wall. The shadows behind it scarcely move and I can no longer distinguish their outline. With every second my sense of <em>hearing</em> grows duller. I hear the quiet squeak of a mouse, fussing beneath the floor but I am deaf to the thunders rolling above my head. The silence of delusion envelops me and I desperately strain my ears to catch the voices of frankness. I left them behind that impenetrable wall. With each moment <em>Truth</em> flees from Me. In vain my words try to overtake it: they merely shoot by. In vain I seek to surround it in the tight embraces of my thoughts and rivet it with chains: the prison disappears like air and my embraces envelop nothing but emptiness. Only yesterday it seemed to me that I had caught my prey. I imprisoned it and fastened it to the wall with a heavy chain, but when I came to view it in the morning⁠—I found nothing but a shackled skeleton. The rusty chains dangled loosely from its neck while the skull was nodding to me in brazen laughter.</p>
				<p>You see, I am again seeking comparisons, only to have the <em>Truth</em> escape me! But what can I do when I have left all my weapons at <em>home</em> and must resort to your poor arsenal? Let God himself don this human form and He will immediately begin to speak to you in exquisite French or Yiddish and He will be unable to say <em>more</em> than it is possible to say in exquisite French or Yiddish. God! And I am only Satan, a modest, careless, human Devil!</p>
				<p>Of course, it was careless of me. But when I looked upon <em>your human</em> life from <em>beyond</em> … no, wait: You and I have just been caught in a lie, old man! When I said from <em>Beyond</em> you understood at once it must have been very far away. Yes? You may have already determined, perhaps, the approximate number of miles. Have you not at your disposal a limitless number of zeros? Ah, it is not true. My “<em>Beyond</em>” is as close as your “<em>Here</em>,” and is no further away than <em>this</em> very spot. You see what nonsense, what a lie you and I are pirouetting about! Cast away your meter and your scales and only listen as if behind your back there were no ticking of a clock and in your breast there were no counting machine. And so: when I looked upon your life from <em>Beyond</em> it appeared to Me a great and merry game of immortal fragments.</p>
				<p>Do you know what a puppets’ show is? When one doll breaks, its place is taken by another, but the play goes on. The music is not silenced, the auditors continue to applaud and it is all very interesting. Does the spectator concern himself about the fate of the fragments, thrust upon the scrap heap? He simply looks on in enjoyment. So it was with me, too. I heard the beat of the drums, and watched the antics of the clowns. And I so love immortal play that I felt like becoming an actor myself. Ah, I did not know then that it is not a <em>play</em> at all. And that the scrap heap was terrible when one becomes a puppet himself and that the broken fragments reeked with blood. You deceived me, my friend!</p>
				<p>But you are astonished. You knit your brow in contempt and ask: Who is this Satan who does not <em>know</em> such <em>simple</em> things? You are accustomed to respect the Devil. You listen to the commonest dog as if he were speaking ex cathedra. You have surrendered to me your last dollar as if I were a professor of white and black magic and suddenly I reveal myself an ignoramus in the most elementary matters! I understand your disappointment. I myself have grown to respect mediums and cards. I am ashamed to confess that I cannot perform a single trick or kill a bedbug by simply casting my eye upon it, but even with my finger. But what matters most to me is truth: Yes, I did not know your <em>simplest</em> things! Apparently the blame for this is for that <em>divide</em> which separates us. Just as you do not know <em>my</em> real Name and cannot pronounce a simple thing like that, so I did not know <em>yours</em>, my earthly shadow, and only now, in great ecstasy do I begin to grasp the wealth that is in you. Think of it: such a simple matter as counting I had to learn from Wondergood. I would not even be able to button my attire if it were not for the experienced and dexterous fingers of that fine chap Wondergood!</p>
				<p>Now I am human, like you. The limited sensation of my being I regard as my <em>knowledge</em> and with respect I now touch my own nose, when necessity arises: it is not merely a nose⁠—it is an axiom! I am now myself a struggling doll in a theater of marionettes. My porcelain head moves to the right and to the left. My hands move up and down. I am merry, I am gay. I am at play. I know everything … except: whose hand it is that pulls the string behind Me. And in the distance I can see the scrap heap from which protrude two little feet clad in ball slippers. …</p>
				<p>No, this is not the <em>play</em> of the <em>Immortal</em> that I sought. It no more resembles merriment than do the convulsions of an epileptic a good negro dance! Here anyone is what he is and here everyone seeks not to be what he is. And it is this endless process of fraud that I mistook for a merry theater: what a mistake, how silly it was of “almighty, immortal” … Satan! Here everyone is dragging everyone else to court: the living are dragging the dead, the dead⁠—the living. The history of the former is the history of the latter. And God, too, is History! And this endless nonsense, this dirty stream of false witnesses, of perjurers, of false judges and false scoundrels I mistook for the <em>play</em> of immortals! Or have I landed in the <em>wrong</em> place? Tell Me, stranger: whither does <em>this</em> road lead? You are pale. Your trembling finger points in the direction of … ah, the scrap heap!</p>
				<p>Yesterday, I questioned Toppi about his former life, the first time he donned the human form: I wanted to know how a doll feels when its head is cracking and the thread which moves it is severed. We lit our pipes and with steins of beer before us, like two good Germans, we ventured into the realm of philosophy. It developed, however, that this numbskull has <em>forgotten</em> everything and my questions only confused him.</p>
				<p>“Is it possible that you have really forgotten everything, Toppi!”</p>
				<p>“Wait till you die and you will learn all about it yourself. I do not like to think of it. What good is it?”</p>
				<p>“Then it is not good?”</p>
				<p>“And have you ever heard of anyone praising it?”</p>
				<p>“Quite true. No one has yet showered praises upon it.”</p>
				<p>“And no one will, I know!”</p>
				<p>We sat silent.</p>
				<p>“And do you remember, Toppi, whence you have come?”</p>
				<p>“From Illinois⁠—the same place you come from.”</p>
				<p>“No, I am speaking of <em>something else</em>. Do you remember whence you came? Do you recollect your real Name?”</p>
				<p>Toppi looked at me strangely, paled slightly and proceeded to clean his pipe. Then he arose and without lifting his eyes, said:</p>
				<p>“I beg you not to speak to me <em>thus</em>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. I am an honest citizen of the United States and I do not understand your insinuations.”</p>
				<p>But he remembers. Not in vain did he grow pale. He is seeking to forget and will forget soon enough! This double play of earth and heaven is too much for him and he has surrendered entirely to the earth! There will come a time when he will take me off to an insane asylum or betray me to Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr> if I dare to speak to him of Satan.</p>
				<p>“I respect you, Toppi. You are quite a man,” I said and kissed his brow: I always kiss the brow of people I love.</p>
				<p>Again I departed for the green Campagna desert: I follow the best models: when I am ill at ease I go into the desert. There I called for Satan and cursed his name but he would not answer me. I lay there long in the dust, pleading, when from somewhere in the depths of the desert I heard the muffled tread of feet, and a bright light helped Me to arise. And again I saw the Eden I had left behind, its green tents and unfading sunrise, its quiet lights upon the placid waters. And again I <em>heard</em> the silent murmurs of lips born of Immaculate Conception while toward my eyes I saw approaching Truth. And I stretched out my hands to Her and pleaded: Give me back my liberty!⁠—</p>
				<p>“<em>Maria!</em>”</p>
				<p>Who called: Maria? Satan again departed, the lights upon the placid waters were extinguished and Truth, frightened, disappeared⁠—and again I sit upon the earth wearing my human form and gazing dully upon the painted world. And on my knees rested my shackled hands.</p>
				<p>“Maria!”</p>
				<p>… It is painful for me to admit that all this is really an invention: the coming of Satan with his “light and ringing step,” the gardens of Eden and my shackled hands. But I needed your attention and I could not get it without these gardens of Eden and these chains, the two extremes of your life. The gardens of Eden⁠—how beautiful! Chains⁠—how terrible! Moreover, all this talk is much more entertaining than merely squatting on a hill, cigar in one’s <em>free</em> hand, thinking lazily and yawning while awaiting the arrival of the chauffeur. And as far as <em>Maria</em> is concerned, I brought her into the situation because from afar I could see the black cypress trees above the Magnus home. An involuntary association of ideas … you understand.</p>
				<p>Can a man with such sight really see Satan? Can a person of such dull <em>ear</em> hear the so-called “murmurs” born of Immaculate Conception? Nonsense! And, please, I beg of you, call Me just Wondergood. Call me just Wondergood until the day when I crack my skull open with that plaything which opens the <em>most narrow</em> door into <em>limitless</em> space. Call me just Henry Wondergood, of Illinois: you will find that I will respond promptly and obligingly.</p>
				<p>But if, some day, you should find my head crushed, examine carefully its <em>fragments</em>: there, in red ink will be engraved the proud name of Satan! Bend thy head, in reverence and bow to him⁠—but do not do me the honor of accompanying my fragments to the scrap heap: one should never bow so respectfully to chains cast off!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="entry-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">March 9, 1914.<br/>
					Rome, Villa Orsini.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Last night I had an important conversation with Thomas Magnus. When Maria had retired I began as usual to prepare to return home but Magnus detained me.</p>
				<p>“Why go, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood? Stay here for the night. Stay here and listen to the barking of Mars!”</p>
				<p>For several days dense clouds had been gathering over Rome and a heavy rain had been beating down upon its walls and ruins. This morning I read in a newspaper a very portentous weather bulletin: <i xml:lang="it">cielo nuvolo il vento forte e mare molto agitato.</i> Toward evening the threat turned into a storm and the enraged sea hurled across a range of ninety miles its moist odors upon the walls of Rome. And the real Roman sea, the billowy Campagna, sang forth with all the voices of the tempest, like the ocean, and at moments it seemed that its immovable hills, its ancient waves, long evaporated by the sun, had once more come to life and moved forward upon the city walls. Mad Mars, this creator of terror and tempest, flew like an arrow across its wide spaces, crushed the head of every blade of grass to the ground, sighed and panted and hurled heavy gusts of wind into the whining cypress trees. Occasionally he would seize and hurl the nearest objects he could lay his hands upon: the brick roofs of the houses shook beneath his blows and their stone walls roared as if inside the very stones the imprisoned wind was gasping and seeking an escape.</p>
				<p>We listened to the storm all evening. Maria was calm but Magnus was visibly nervous, constantly rubbed his white hands and listened intently to the antics of the wind: to its murderous whistle, its roar and its signs, its laughter and its groans … the wild-haired artist was cunning enough to be slayer and victim, to strangle and to plead for mercy at one and the same time! If Magnus had the moving ears of an animal, they would have remained immovable. His thin nose trembled, his dim eyes grew dark, as if they reflected the shadows of the clouds, his thin lips were twisted into a quick and strange smile. I, too, was quite excited: it was the first time since I became human I had heard such a storm and it raised in me a white terror: almost with the horror of a child I avoided the windows, beyond which lay the night. Why does it not come here, I thought: can the window pane possibly keep it out if it should wish to break through? …</p>
				<p>Someone knocked at the iron gates several times, the gates at which I and Toppi once knocked for admission.</p>
				<p>“That is my chauffeur, who has come to fetch me,” said I: “we must admit him.”</p>
				<p>Magnus glanced at me from the corner of his eye and remarked sadly:</p>
				<p>“There is no road on that side of the house. There is nothing but field there. That is mad Mars who is begging for admittance.”</p>
				<p>And as if he had actually heard his words, Mars broke out into laughter and disappeared whistling. But the knocking was soon resumed. It seemed as if someone were tearing off the iron gates and several voices, shouting and interrupting each other, were anxiously speaking; an infant was heard weeping.</p>
				<p>“Those must be people who have lost their way … you hear⁠—an infant! We must open the gates.”</p>
				<p>“Well, we’ll see,” said Magnus angrily.</p>
				<p>“I will go with you, Magnus.”</p>
				<p>“Sit still, Wondergood. This friend of mine, here, is quite enough. …” He quickly drew <em>that</em> revolver from the table drawer and with a peculiar expression of love and even gentleness he grasped it in his broad hand and carefully hid it in his pocket. He walked out and we could hear the cry that met him at the gate.</p>
				<p>On that evening I somehow avoided Maria’s eyes and I felt quite ill at ease when we were left alone. And suddenly I felt like sinking to the floor, and kneeling before her so that her dress might touch my face: I felt as if I had hair on my back, that sparks would at any moment begin to fly if someone were to touch it and that this would relieve me. Thus, in my mind, I moved closer and closer to Her, when Magnus returned and silently put the revolver back into the drawer. The voices at the door had ceased and the knocking, too.</p>
				<p>“Who was that?” … asked Maria.</p>
				<p>Magnus angrily shook off the drops of rain upon his coat.</p>
				<p>“Crazy Mars. Who else did you expect?”</p>
				<p>“But I thought I heard you speak to him?” I jested, trying to conceal the shiver produced by the cold brought in by Magnus.</p>
				<p>“Yes, I told him it was not polite⁠—to drag about with him such suspicious company. He excused himself and said he would come no more,” Magnus laughed and added: “I am convinced that all the murderers of Rome and the Campagna are tonight threatening to ambush people and hugging their stilettos as if they were their sweethearts. …”</p>
				<p>Again came a muffled and timid knock.</p>
				<p>“Again!” cried Magnus, angrily, as if Mad Mars had really promised to knock no more. But the knock was followed by the ring of a bell: it was my chauffeur. Maria retired, while I, as I have already said, had been invited by Magnus to remain overnight, to which I agreed, after some hesitation: I was not at all taken by Magnus and his revolver, and still less was I attracted by the silly darkness.</p>
				<p>The kind host himself went out to dismiss the chauffeur. Through the window I could see the bright lights of the lanterns of the machine and for a moment I yearned to return home to my pleasant sinners, who were probably imbibing their wine at that moment in expectation of my return. … Ah, I have long since abandoned philanthropy and am now leading the life of a drunkard and a gambler. And again, as on that first night, the quiet little white house, this <em>soul</em> of Maria, looked terrible and suspicious: this revolver, these stains of <em>blood</em> upon the white hands … and, maybe there are more stains like these here.</p>
				<p>But it was too late to change my mind. The machine had gone and Magnus, by the light, had not a <em>blue</em>, but a very black and beautiful beard and his eyes were smiling pleasantly. In his broad hand he carried not a weapon, but two bottles of wine, and from afar he shouted merrily:</p>
				<p>“On a night like this there is but one thing to do, to drink wine. Even Mars, when I spoke to him, looked drunk to me … the rogue! Your glass, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood!”</p>
				<p>But when the glasses had been filled, this merry drunkard hardly touched the wine and sitting deep in his chair asked me to drink and to talk. Without particular enthusiasm, listening to the noise of the wind and thinking about the length of the night before us, I told Magnus of the new and insistent visits of Cardinal <abbr class="name eoc">X.</abbr> It seemed to me that the Cardinal had actually put spies on my trail and what is more strange: he has managed to gain quite an influence over the unbribable Toppi. Toppi is still the same devoted friend of mine but he seems to have grown sad, goes to confessional every day and is trying to persuade me to accept Catholicism.</p>
				<p>Magnus listened calmly to my story and with still greater reluctance I told him of the many unsuccessful efforts to open my purse: of the endless petitions, badly written, in which the truth appears to be falsehood because of the boresome monotony of tears, bows and naive flattery; of crazy inventors, of all sorts of people with hasty projects, gentlemen who seek to utilize as quickly as possible their temporary absence from jail⁠—of all this hungry mass of humanity aroused by the smell of <em>weakly</em> protected billions. My secretaries⁠—there are six of them now⁠—hardly manage to handle all this mess of tears on paper, and the madly babbling fools who fill the doors of my palace.</p>
				<p>“I fear that I will have to build me an underground exit: they are watching me even at nights. They are aiming at me with picks and shovels, as if they were in the Klondike. The nonsense published by these accursed newspapers about the billions I am ready to give away to every fool displaying a wound in his leg, or an empty pocket, has driven them out of their senses. I believe that some night they will divide me into portions and eat me. They are organizing regular pilgrimages to my palace and come with huge bags. My ladies, who regard me as their property, have found for me a little Dante Inferno, where we take daily walks in company with the society that storms my place. Yesterday we examined an old witch whose entire worth consists in the fact that she has outlived her husband, her children and her grandchildren, and is now in need of snuff. And some angry old man refused to be consoled and even would not take any money until all of us had smelled the old putrid wound in his foot. It was indeed a horrible odor. This cross old fellow is the pride of my ladies, and like all favorites, he is capricious, and temperamental. And … are you tired of listening to me, Magnus. I could tell you of a whole flock of ragged fathers, hungry children, green and rotten like certain kinds of cheese, of noble geniuses who despise me like a negro, of clever drunkards with merry, red noses. … My ladies are not very keen on drunkards, but I love them better than any other kind of goods. And how do you feel about it, Signor Magnus?”</p>
				<p>Magnus was silent. I too was tired of talking. Mad Mars alone continued his antics: he was now ensconced upon the roof, trying to bite a hole in the center, and crushing the tiles as he would a lump of sugar. Magnus broke the silence:</p>
				<p>“The newspapers seem to have little to say about you recently. What is the matter?”</p>
				<p>“I pay the interviewers not to write anything. At first I drove them away but they began interviewing my horses and now I pay them for their silence by the line. Have you a customer for my villa, Magnus? I shall sell it together with the artists and the rest of its paraphernalia.”</p>
				<p>We again grew silent and paced up and down the room: Magnus rose first and then sat down. I followed and sat down too. In addition, I drank two more glasses of wine while Magnus drank none. … His nose is never red. Suddenly he said with determination:</p>
				<p>“Do not drink any more wine, Wondergood.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, very well. I want no more wine. Is that all?”</p>
				<p>Magnus continued to question me at long intervals. His voice was sharp and stern, while mine was … melodious, I would say.</p>
				<p>“There has been a great change in you, Wondergood.”</p>
				<p>“Quite possible, thank you, Magnus.”</p>
				<p>“There used to be more life in you. Now you rarely jest. You have become very morose, Wondergood.”</p>
				<p>“Oh!”</p>
				<p>“You have even grown thin and your brow is sallow. Is it true that you get drunk every night in the company of your … friends?”</p>
				<p>“It seems so.”</p>
				<p>“… that you play cards, squander your gold, and that recently someone had been nearly murdered at your table?”</p>
				<p>“I fear that is true. I recollect that one gentleman actually tried to pierce another gentleman with his fork. And how do you know all about that?”</p>
				<p>He replied sternly and significantly:</p>
				<p>“Toppi was here yesterday. He wanted to see … Maria but I myself received him. With all due respect to you, Wondergood, I must say that your secretary is unusually stupid.”</p>
				<p>I acquiesced coldly.</p>
				<p>“You are quite right. You should have driven him out.”</p>
				<p>I must say for my part, that my last two glasses of wine evaporated from me at the mention of <em>Maria’s</em> name, and our attempted conversation was marked by continued evaporation of the wine I drank, like perfume out of a bottle. I have always regarded wine as unreliable matter. We found ourselves again listening to the storm and I remarked:</p>
				<p>“The wind seems to be growing more violent, Signor Magnus.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, the wind seems to be growing more violent, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. But you must admit that I warned you beforehand, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood.”</p>
				<p>“Of what did you warn me beforehand, Signor Magnus?”</p>
				<p>He seized his knees with his white hands and directed upon me the gaze of a snake charmer. … Ah, he did not know that I myself had extracted my poisoned teeth and was quite harmless, like a mummy in a museum! Finally, he realized that there was no use beating about the bush, and came straight to the point:</p>
				<p>“I warned you in regard to <em>Maria</em>,” he said slowly, with peculiar insinuation. “You remember that I did not desire your acquaintance and expressed it plainly enough? You have not forgotten <em>what</em> I told you about Maria, of her fatal influence upon the soul? But you were bold and insistent and I yielded. And now you ask us⁠—me and my daughter⁠—to view the highly exhilarating spectacle of a gentleman in the process of disintegration, one who asks nothing, who reproaches no one, but can find no solace until everyone has smelled his wound. … I do not want to repeat your expression, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. It has a bad odor. Yes, sir, you have spoken quite frankly of your … neighbors and I am sincerely glad you have finally abandoned this cheap play at love and humanity. … You have so many other pastimes! I confess, however, that I am not at all overjoyed at your intention of presenting to <em>us</em> the <em>sediment</em> of a gentleman. It seems to me, sir, that you made a mistake in leaving America and your … canning business: dealing with people requires quite a different sort of ability.”</p>
				<p>He laughed! He was almost driving Me out, this little man, and I, who write my “I” in a super-capital, I listened to him humbly and meekly. It was divinely ridiculous! Here is another detail for those who love the ridiculous: before his tirade began my eyes and the cigar between my teeth were quite bravely and nonchalantly directed toward the ceiling, but they changed their attitude before he had finished. … To this very moment I feel the taste of that miserable dangling, extinguished cigar. I was choking with laughter … that is I did not yet know whether to choke with laughter or with wrath. Or, without choking at all, to ask him for an umbrella and leave. Ah, he was at <em>home</em>, he was on his <em>own</em> ground, this angry, black bearded man. He knew how to manage himself in this situation and he sang a <em>solo</em>, not a <em>duet</em>, like the inseparable Satan of Eternity and Wondergood of Illinois!</p>
				<p>“Sir!” I said with dignity: “There seems to be a sad misunderstanding here. You see before you Satan in <em>human form</em> … you understand? He went out for an evening stroll and was lost in the forest … in the forest, sir, in the forest! Won’t you be good enough, sir, to direct him to the nearest road to Eternity? Ah, Ah! Thank you. <em>So</em> I thought myself. Farewell!”</p>
				<p>Of course, I really did not say that. I was <em>silent</em> and gave the floor to Wondergood. And this is what that respectable gentleman said, dropping his wet, dead cigar:</p>
				<p>“The devil take it! You are quite right, Magnus. Thank you, old man. Yes, you warned me quite honestly, but I preferred to play a lone hand. Now I am a bankrupt and at your mercy. I shall have no objection if you should order the removal of the <em>sediment</em> of the gentleman.”</p>
				<p>I thought that without waiting for a stretcher, Magnus would simply throw the sediment out of the window, but his generosity proved quite surprising: he looked at Me with pity and even stretched out his hand.</p>
				<p>“You are suffering very much, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”⁠—a question quite difficult to answer for the celebrated <em>duet</em>! I blinked and shrugged my shoulders. This appeared to satisfy Magnus and for a few moments we were both silent. I do not know of what Magnus was thinking. I thought of nothing: I simply examined with great interest, the walls, the ceiling, books, pictures⁠—all the furnishings of this human habitation. I was particularly absorbed in the electric light upon which I fixed my attention: why does <em>it</em> burn and give light?</p>
				<p>“I am waiting for your answer, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood.”</p>
				<p>So he was really expecting me to reply? Very well.</p>
				<p>“It’s very simple, Magnus … you warned me, I admit. Tomorrow Toppi will pack my trunks and I shall go back to America to resume my … business.”</p>
				<p>“And the Cardinal?”</p>
				<p>“What Cardinal? Ah, yes! … Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr> and my billions. I remember. But⁠—don’t gaze at me in such astonishment, Magnus. I am sick of it.”</p>
				<p>“What are you sick of, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”</p>
				<p>“<em>It.</em> Six secretaries. Brainless old women, snuff, and my Dante Inferno, where they take me for my walks. Don’t look at me so sternly, Magnus. Probably one could have made better wine out of my billions, but I managed to produce only sour beer. Why did you refuse to help me? Of course, you hate human beings, I forgot.”</p>
				<p>“But you <em>love</em> them?”</p>
				<p>“What shall I say, Magnus? No, I am rather indifferent to them. Don’t look at me so … pityingly. By God, it isn’t worth it! Yes, I am indifferent to them. There are, there were and there will be so many of them that it isn’t really worth while. …”</p>
				<p>“So I am to conclude that you <em>lied</em>?”</p>
				<p>“Look not at me but at my packed trunks. No, I did not lie, not entirely. You know, I wanted to do something interesting for the sake of amusement and so I let loose this … this emotion. …”</p>
				<p>“So it was only <em>play</em>? …”</p>
				<p>I blinked again and shrugged my shoulders. I like this method of reply to complex questions. And <em>this</em> face of Signor Thomas Magnus appealed to me, too; his long, oval face recompensed me slightly for my theatrical failures and … Maria. I must add that by this time there was a fresh cigar in my mouth.</p>
				<p>“You said that in your past there are some dark pages. … What’s the trouble, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood?”</p>
				<p>“Oh! it was a slight exaggeration. Nothing in particular, Magnus. I beg your pardon for disturbing you needlessly, but at that time I thought I should have spoken thus for the sake of style. …”</p>
				<p>“Style?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, and the laws of contrast. The present is always brighter with a dark past as a background … you understand? But I have already told you, Magnus, that my prank had little result. In the place I come from they have quite a mistaken conception of the pleasures of the game here. I shall have to disabuse them when I get back. For a moment I was taken in by the old monkey, but its method of fleecing people is rather ancient and too certain … like a counting house. I prefer an element of risk.”</p>
				<p>“Fleecing people?”</p>
				<p>“Don’t we despise them, Magnus? And if the game has failed, let us not at least deny ourselves the pleasure of speaking frankly. I am very glad. But I am tired of this prattle and, with your permission, I will take another glass of wine.”</p>
				<p>There was not even the resemblance of a smile on Thomas Magnus’ face. I mention the smile for the sake of … style. We passed the next half hour in silence, broken only by the shrieks and yells of Mad Mars and the even pacing of Magnus. With his hands behind him and disregarding me entirely he paced the room with even step: eight steps forward, eight steps backward. Apparently he must have been in jail at one time and for quite a while: for he had the knack of the experienced prisoner of creating distances out of a few meters. I permitted myself to yawn slightly and thus drew the attention of my host back to myself. But Magnus kept quiet for another moment, until the <em>following words</em> rang out through the air and well nigh hurled me out of my seat:</p>
				<p>“But <em>Maria</em> loves you. Of course, you do not know that?”</p>
				<p>I arose.</p>
				<p>“Yes, that is the truth: Maria loves you. I did not expect this misfortune. I failed to kill you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. I should have done that at the very beginning and now I do not know what to do with you. What do you think about it?”</p>
				<p>I stretched and …</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>… Maria loves <em>Me</em>!</p>
				<p>I once witnessed in Philadelphia an unsuccessful electrocution of a prisoner. I saw at “La Scala” in Milan my colleague Mephisto <em>cringing</em> and hopping all over the stage when the supers moved upon him with their crosses⁠—and my silent reply to Magnus was an artistic improvisation of both the first and the second trick: ah, at that moment I could think of nothing better to imitate! I swear by eternal salvation that never before had I been permeated by so many deadly currents, never did I drink such bitter wine, never was my soul seized with such uncontrollable <em>laughter</em>!</p>
				<p>Now I no longer laugh or cringe, like a cheap actor. I am alone and only my own seriousness can hear and see Me. But in that moment of triumph I needed all my strength to control my laughter so that I might not deal ringing blows to the face of this stern and honest man hurling the Madonna into the embraces of … the Devil. Do you really think so? No? Or are you merely thinking of Wondergood, the American, with his goatee and wet cigar between his gold teeth! Hatred and contempt, love and anguish, wrath and laughter⁠—these filled to the brim the cup presented to Me … no, still worse, still more bitter, still more deadly! What do I care about the deceived Magnus or the stupidity of his eyes and brain? But how could the pure eyes of <em>Maria</em> have been deceived?</p>
				<p>Or am I really such a clever Don Juan that I can turn the head of an innocent and trusting girl by a few simple, silent meetings? Madonna, where art Thou? Or, has she discovered a resemblance between myself and one of her saints, like Toppi’s. But I do not carry with me a traveling prayer book! Madonna, where art Thou? Are thy lips stretching out to mine? Madonna, where art Thou? Or? …</p>
				<p>And yet I cringed like an actor. I sought to stifle in respectful mumbling my hatred and my contempt when this new “<em>or</em>” suddenly filled me with new confusion and such love … ah, such love!</p>
				<p>“<em>Or</em>,” thought I, “has <em>Thy</em> immortality, Madonna, echoed the immortality of Satan and is it now stretching forth this gentle hand to it from the realms of Eternity? Thou, who art <em>divine</em>, hast thou recognized a friend in him who has become <em>human</em>? Thou, who art <em>above</em>, dost thou pity him who is <em>below</em>? Oh, Madonna, lay thy hand upon my dark head that I may recognize thee by thy touch! …”</p>
				<p>But hear what further transpired that night.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>“I know not why Maria has fallen in love with you. That is a secret of her soul, too much for my understanding. No, I do not know, but I bow to her will as to her frankness. What are my human eyes before her all-penetrating gaze, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood! …”</p>
				<p>(The latter, too, was saying the same thing.)</p>
				<p>“A moment ago, in a fit of excitement,” continued Magnus, “I said something about murder and death. … No, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, you may rest secure forever: the chosen one of Maria enjoys complete immunity as far as I am concerned. He is protected by more than the law⁠—her pure love is his armor. Of course, I shall have to ask you to leave us at once. And I believe in your honest intention, Wondergood, to place the ocean between us. …”</p>
				<p>“But. …”</p>
				<p>Magnus moved forward towards me and shouted angrily:</p>
				<p>“Not another word! … I cannot kill you but if you dare to mention the word ‘marriage,’ I! …”</p>
				<p>He slowly dropped his uplifted hand, and continued calmly:</p>
				<p>“I see that I will have to beg your pardon again for my fit of passion, but it is better than <em>falsehood</em>, examples of which we have had from you. Do not defend yourself, Wondergood. It is quite unnecessary. And of marriage let <em>me</em> speak: it will ring less insulting to Maria than it would from your lips. It is quite unthinkable. Remember that. I am a sober realist: I see nothing but mere coincidence in <em>that fatal</em> resemblance of Maria and I am not at all taken aback by the thought that my daughter, with all her unusual qualities, may some day become a wife and mother. … My categorical opposition to this marriage was simply another means of warning you. Yes, I am accustomed to look soberly upon things, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood. It is not you who is destined to be Maria’s life partner! You do not know me at all and now I am compelled to raise slightly the curtain behind which I am hiding these many years: my idleness is merely rest. I am not at all a peaceful villager or a book philosopher. I am a man of struggle. I am a warrior on the battlefield of life! And my Maria will be the gift only of a hero, if⁠—if I should ever find a hero.”</p>
				<p>I said:</p>
				<p>“You may rest assured, Signor Magnus, that I will not permit myself to utter a single word in regard to Signorina Maria. You know that I am not a hero. But I should think it permissible to ask of you: how am I to reconcile your present remarks with your former <em>contempt</em> for man? I recollect that you spoke seriously of gallows and prisons.”</p>
				<p>Magnus laughed loudly:</p>
				<p>“And do you remember what you said about your <em>love</em> for man? Ah, my dear Wondergood: I would be a bad warrior and politician if my education did not embrace the art of lying a little. We were both playing, that’s all!”</p>
				<p>“You played better,” I admitted quite gloomily.</p>
				<p>“And you played very badly, my friend⁠—do not be offended. But what am I to do when there suddenly appears before me a gentleman all loaded with gold like. …”</p>
				<p>“Like an ass. Continue.”</p>
				<p>“And begins to reveal to me his love for humanity, while his confidence in his success is equal only to the quantity of the dollars in his pocket? The main fault of your play, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, is that you are too eager for success and seek immediate results. This makes the spectator cold and less credulous. To be sure, I really did not think you were merely acting⁠—the worst play is better than sincere assininity⁠—and I must again crave your pardon: you seemed to me just one of those foolish Yankees who really take their own bombastic and contemptible tirades seriously and … you understand?”</p>
				<p>“Quite fully. I beg you to continue.”</p>
				<p>“Only one phrase of yours⁠—something about war and revolution purchasable with your billions⁠—seemed to me to possess a modicum of interest, but the rest of the drivel proved that that, too, was a mere slip of the tongue, an accidental excerpt of someone else’s text. Your newspaper triumphs, your flippancy in serious matters⁠—remember Cardinal <abbr class="name">X.</abbr>!⁠—your cheap philanthropy are of a quite different tone. … No, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, you are not fit for serious drama! And your prattling today, despite its cynicism, made a better impression than your flamboyant circus pathos. I say frankly: were it not for <em>Maria</em> I would gladly have had a good laugh at your expense, and, without the slightest compunction would have raised the farewell cup!”</p>
				<p>“Just one correction, Magnus: I earnestly desired that you should take part. …”</p>
				<p>“In what? In your play? Yes, your play lacked the <em>creative factor</em> and you earnestly desired to saddle me with your poverty of spirit. Just as you hire your artists to paint and decorate your palaces so you wanted to hire my will and my imagination, my power and my love!”</p>
				<p>“But your hatred for man. …”</p>
				<p>Up to this point Magnus had maintained his tone of irony and subtle ridicule: my remark, however, seemed to change him entirely. He grew pale, his white hands moved convulsively over his body as if they were searching for a weapon, and his face became threatening and even horrible. As if fearing the power of his own voice, he lowered it almost to a whisper; as if fearing that his words would break their leash and run off at a wild pace, he tried desperately to hold them in check and in order.</p>
				<p>“Hatred? Be silent, sir. Or have you no conscience at all or any common sense? My contempt! My hatred! They were my reply, not to your theatrical <em>love</em>, but to your sincere and dead indifference. You were insulting <em>me</em> as a human being by your indifference: You were insulting life by your indifference. It was in your voice, it gleamed savagely out of your eyes, and more than once was I seized by terror … terror, sir!⁠—when I pierced deeper the mysterious emptiness of your pupils. If your past has no dark pages, which, as you say, you merely added for the sake of style, then there is something worse than that in it: there are <em>white</em> pages in it. And I cannot read them! …”</p>
				<p>“Oh, oh!”</p>
				<p>“When I look at your eternal cigar, and see your self-satisfied but handsome and energetic face; when I view your unassuming manner, in which the simplicity of the grog shop is elevated to the heights of Puritanism, I fully understand your naive game. But I need only meet the pupil of your eye … or its <em>white</em> rim and I am immediately hurled into a void, I am seized with alarm and I no longer see either your cigar or your gold teeth and I am ready to exclaim: who are you that you dare to bear yourself with such indifference?”</p>
				<p>The situation was becoming interesting. <em>Madonna</em> loves Me and this creature is about ready to utter my Name at any moment! Is he the son of my Father? How could he unravel the great mystery of my boundless indifference: I tried so carefully to conceal it, even from you!</p>
				<p>“Here! here!” shouted Magnus, in great excitement, “again there are two little tears in your eyes, as I have noticed before. They are a <em>lie</em>, Wondergood! There is no source of tears behind them. They have fallen from somewhere above, from the clouds, like dew. Rather laugh: behind your laughter I see merely a bad man, but behind your tears there are <em>white</em> pages, white pages! … or has Maria read them?”</p>
				<p>Without taking his eyes off me, as if fearing that I might run away, Magnus paced the room, finally seating himself opposite Me. His face grew dim and his voice seemed tired, when he said:</p>
				<p>“But it seems to me that I am exciting myself in vain. …”</p>
				<p>“Do not forget, Magnus, that today I myself spoke to you of indifference.”</p>
				<p>He waved his hand wearily and carelessly.</p>
				<p>“Yes, you did speak. But there is something else involved here, Wondergood. There is nothing insulting in the indifference, but in the other … I sensed it immediately upon your appearance with your billions. I do not know whether you will understand what I mean, but I immediately felt like shouting of hatred and to demand gallows and blood. The gallows is a gloomy thing but the curious jostling about the gallows, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, are quite unbearable! I do not know what they think of our game here in the ‘place’ you come from, but we pay for it with our lives, and when there suddenly appears before us some curious gentleman in a top hat, cigar in mouth, one feels, you understand, like seizing him by the back of his neck and … he never stays to the end of the performance, anyway. Have you, too, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wondergood, dropped in on us for a brief visit?”</p>
				<p>With what a long sigh I uttered the name of <em>Maria</em>! … And I no longer played, I no longer lied, when I replied to this gloomy man:</p>
				<p>“Yes, I have dropped in on you for a brief visit, Signor Magnus. You have guessed right. For certain very valid reasons I can reveal nothing to you of the <em>white</em> pages of my life, the existence of which behind my leather binding you have likewise guessed. But on one of them was written: <em>death-departure</em>. That was not a top hat in the hands of the curious visitor, but a revolver … you understand: I look on as long as it is interesting and after that I make my bow and depart. Let me put it clearer and simpler, out of deference to your realism: in a few days, perhaps tomorrow, I depart for the other world. … No, that is not clear enough: in a few days or tomorrow I shall shoot myself, kill myself with a revolver. I at first planned to aim at my heart but have decided that the brain would be more reliable. I have planned all this long ago, at the very beginning … of my appearance before you, and was it not in this <em>readiness</em> of mine to depart that you have detected ‘inhuman’ indifference? Isn’t it true that when one eye is directed upon the <em>other</em> world, it is hardly possible to maintain any particularly bright flame in the eye directed upon <em>this</em> world? … I refer to the kind of flame I see in your eyes. O! you have wonderful eyes, Signor Magnus.”</p>
				<p>Magnus remained silent for a few moments and then said:</p>
				<p>“And Maria?”</p>
				<p>“Permit me to reply. I prize Signorina Maria too highly not to regard her <em>love</em> for me as a fatal mistake.”</p>
				<p>“But you wanted that love?”</p>
				<p>“It is very difficult for me to answer that question. At first, perhaps⁠—when I indulged in dreams for a while⁠—but the more I perceived this fatal resemblance. …”</p>
				<p>“That is mere resemblance,” Magnus hastened to assure me: “But you mustn’t be a child, Wondergood! Maria’s soul is lofty and beautiful, but she is human, made of flesh and bone. She probably has her own little sins, too. …”</p>
				<p>“And how about my top hat, Magnus? How about my <em>free</em> departure? I need only buy a seat to gaze upon Maria and her fatal resemblance⁠—admitting that it is only resemblance!⁠—but how must I pay for <em>love</em>?”</p>
				<p>Magnus said sternly:</p>
				<p>“Only with your life.”</p>
				<p>“You see: only with my life! How, then, did you expect me to desire such love?”</p>
				<p>“But you have miscalculated: she already loves you.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, if the Signorina Maria really loves me then my <em>death</em> can be no obstacle: however, I do not make myself clear. I wanted to say that my departure … no, I had better say nothing. In short, Signor Magnus: would you agree to have me place my billions at your disposal <em>now</em>?”</p>
				<p>He looked at me quickly:</p>
				<p>“Now?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, now, when we are no longer playing: I at love and you at hatred. Now, when I am about to disappear entirely, taking with me the ‘sediment’ of a gentlemen? Let me make it quite clear: would you like to be my heir?”</p>
				<p>Magnus frowned and looked at me in anger: apparently he took my words for ridicule. But I was calm and serious. It seemed to me that his large, white hands were trembling slightly. He turned away for a moment and then, whirling about quickly, he shouted loudly:</p>
				<p>“No! Again you want. … No!”</p>
				<p>He stamped his foot and cried once more: “No!” His hands were trembling. His breathing was heavy and irregular. There followed a long silence, the wailing of the tempest, the whistling and murmur of the wind. And again, great calm, great, dead, all embracing peace descended upon me. Everything was turned <em>within</em> Me. I still could hear the earthly demons of the storm, but <em>their</em> voices sounded far away and dull. I saw before me a <em>man</em> and he was strange and cold to me, like a stone statue. One after another there floated by me all the days of my human existence. There was the gleam of faces, the weak sound of voices and curious laughter. And then, again all was silent. I turned my gaze to the other side⁠—and there I was met by dumbness. It was as if I were immured between two dumb, stone walls: behind one was <em>their</em> human life, which I had abandoned, and behind the other, in silence and in darkness, stretched forth the world of eternal and real being. Its silence was resounding, its darkness was gleaming, eternal, joyous life beat constantly like breakers, upon the hard rocks of the impenetrable wall. But deaf was my consciousness and silent my thought. From beneath the weak legs of Thought there came <em>Memory</em>⁠—and it hung suspended in the void, immovable, paralyzed for the moment. <em>What</em> did I leave behind the wall of my Unconsciousness?</p>
				<p>Thought made no reply. It was motionless, empty and silent. Two silences surrounded Me, two darknesses enveloped me. Two walls were burying me, and behind one, in the pale movement of shadows, passed their human life, while behind the other⁠—in silence and in darkness stretched forth the world of my real, eternal being. Whence shall I hear The Call? Whither can I take a step?</p>
				<p>And at that moment I suddenly heard the voice of a man, strange and distant. It grew closer and closer, there was a gentle ring in it. It was Magnus speaking. With great effort and concentration, I tried to catch the words and this was what I heard:</p>
				<p>“And wouldn’t you rather continue living, Wondergood?”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="entry-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">March 18.<br/>
					Rome, Palazzo Orsini.</p>
				</header>
				<p>It is three days now that Magnus and Maria are living in my palazzo in Rome. It is empty and silent and really seems huge. Last night, worn by insomnia, I wandered about its halls and stairways, over rooms I had never seen before and their number astonished me. Maria’s <em>soul</em> has expelled from it all that was frivolous and impure and only the saintly Toppi moves through its emptiness, like the pendulum of a church clock. Ah, how saintly he looks. If not for his broad back, the broad folds of his coat, and the odor of fur in his head, I myself would take him for one of the saints who have honored me with their acquaintance.</p>
				<p>I rarely see my guests. I am turning my entire estate into cash and Magnus and Toppi and all the secretaries are busy with this work from morning to night; our telegraph is constantly buzzing. Magnus has little to say to me. He only talks business. Maria … it seems as if I were avoiding her. I can see her through my window walking in the garden, and this is quite enough for me, for her <em>soul</em> is here and every atom of the air is filled with her breath. And, as I have already remarked, I suffer with insomnia.</p>
				<p>As you see, my friend, I have remained among the <em>living</em>, a dead hand could not possibly write even the dead words I am not setting down. Let us forget the past, as sweethearts would who have just settled their differences. Let us be friends, you and I. Give me your hand, my friend! I vow by eternal salvation that never again will I chase you hence or laugh at you: if I have lost the wisdom of the snake I have acquired the gentleness of the dove. I am rather sorry that I have driven away my painters and my interviewers: I have no one to inquire whom I <em>resemble</em> with my radiant countenance? I personally feel that I remind one of a powdered darkey, who is afraid to rub the powder off with his sleeve and thus reveal his black skin … ah, I still have a black skin!</p>
				<p>Yes, I have remained <em>alive</em> but I know not yet how far I shall succeed in keeping up this state: have you any idea how hard are the transitions from a nomad to a settled life? I was a redskin, a carefree nomad, who folds up and casts off all that is human, as he would a tent. Now I am laying a granite foundation for an earthly home and I, having little faith, am cold and trembling. Will it be warm when the white snow covers my new home? What do you think, my friend, is the best heating system?</p>
				<p>I promised Thomas Magnus that night that I would not kill myself. We sealed this agreement with a warm handshake. We did not open our veins nor seal the pact with our blood. We simply said “yes” and that was quite sufficient: as you know only human beings break agreements. Devils always keep them. … You need only recall your horny, hairy heroes and their Spartan honesty. Fortunately (let us call it “fortunate”) we had set no … date. I swear by eternal salvation, I would be a poor king and ruler if, when building a palace, I did not leave for myself a secret exit, a little door, a modest loophole through which wise kings disappear when their foolish subjects rise and break into Versailles.</p>
				<p>I will not kill myself tomorrow. Perhaps I shall wait quite a while. I will not kill myself: of the two walls I have chosen the lower one and I am quite human now, even as you my friend. My earthly experiment is not very thrilling as yet, but who knows?⁠—this human life may unexpectedly grow quite attractive! Has not Toppi lived to grow gray and to a peaceful end? Why should not I, traversing all the ages of man, like the seasons of the year, grow to be a gray old sage, a wise guide and teacher, the bearer of the covenant and arterio sclerosis? Ah, this ridiculous sclerosis, these ills of old age⁠—it is only now that they begin to seem terrible to Me, but, can I not get used to them and even grow to love them? Everyone says it is easy to get used to life. Well, I, too, will try to get used to it. Everything here is so well ordered that after rain comes sunshine and dries him who is wet, if he has not been in too great a hurry to die. Everything here is so well ordered that there is not a single disease for which there is no cure. This is so good! One may be ill all the time, provided there is a drug store nearby!</p>
				<p>At any rate, I have my little door, my secret exit, my narrow, wet, dark corridor, beyond which are the stars and all the breadth of my illimitable space! My friend, I want to be frank with you: there is a certain characteristic of insubordination in me, and it is that I fear. What is a cough or a catarrh of the stomach? But it is possible that I may suddenly refuse to cough, for no reason at all, or for some trivial cause, and run off! I like you at this moment. I am quite ready to conclude a long and fast alliance with you, but <em>something</em> may suddenly gleam across your dear face which … no, it is quite impossible to do without a little secret door for him who is so capricious and insubordinate! Unfortunately, I am proud, too⁠—an old and well known vice of Satan! Like a fish struck in the head, I am dazed by my human existence. A fatal unconsciousness is driving me into your life, but of one thing I am quite certain: I am of the race of the <em>free</em>. I am of the tribe of the <em>rulers</em>. I come from those who transform their will into laws. Conquered kings are taken into captivity but conquered kings never become slaves. And when I shall perceive, above my head, the whip of a dirty guard and my fettered hands are helpless to avert the blow … well: shall I remain living with welts upon my back? Shall I bargain with my judges about another blow of the whip? Shall I kiss the hand of the executioner? Or shall I send to the druggist for an eye lotion?</p>
				<p>No, let not Magnus misjudge me for a little slip in our agreement: I will live only as long as I want to live. All the blessings of the human existence, which he offered me on that night, when Satan was tempted by man, will not strike the weapon from my hand: in it alone is the assurance of my liberty! Oh, man, what are all your kingdoms and dukedoms, your knowledge and your nobility, your gold and your freedom beside this little, free movement of the finger which, in a moment carries you up to the Throne of Thrones! …</p>
				<p>
					<em>Maria!</em>
				</p>
				<p>Yes, I am afraid of her. The look in her eye is so clear and commanding, the light of her love is so mighty, enchanting and beautiful that I am all atremble and everything in me is quivering and urging me to immediate flight. With hitherto unknown happiness, with veiled promises, with singing dreams she tempts Me! Shall I cry: Away!⁠—or shall I bend mine to her will and follow her?</p>
				<p>Where? I do not know. Or are there other worlds beside those I know or have forgotten? Whence comes this motionless light behind my back? It is growing ever broader and brighter. Its warm touch heats my soul, so that its Polar ice crumbles and melts. But I am afraid to look back. I may see Sodom on fire and if I look I may turn into stone. Or is it a new Sun, which I have not yet seen upon this earth that is rising behind my back, and I, like a fool, am fleeing from it and baring my back instead of my breast to it, the low, dumb neck of a frightened animal, instead of my lofty brow?</p>
				<p>Maria! Will you give me my revolver? I paid ten dollars for it, together with the holster. To you I will not give it for a kingdom! Only do not look at Me, oh, Queen … otherwise, otherwise I will give you everything: the revolver and the holster and Satan himself!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="entry-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:diary.dateline">March 26.<br/>
					Rome, Palazzo Orsini.</p>
				</header>
				<p>It is the fifth night that I do not sleep. When the last light is turned out in my silent palazzo, I quietly descend the stairs, quietly order a machine⁠—somehow or other even the noise of my own steps and voice disturb me, and I go for the night into the Campagna. There, leaving the automobile on the road, I wander about until daybreak or sit immovable upon some dark ruins. I cannot be seen at all and the rare passersby, perhaps some peasants from Albano, converse quite loudly and without restraint. I like to remain unseen. It reminds me of something I have forgotten.</p>
				<p>Once, as I sat down on a stone, I disturbed a lizard. It may have been that it lightly moved the grass beneath my feet and disappeared. Perhaps it was a snake? I do not know. But I wanted desperately to become a lizard or a snake, concealed beneath a stone: I am troubled by my large stature, by the size of my feet and arms: They make it very difficult to become invisible. I likewise refrain from looking at my face in the mirror: it is painful to think I have a face, which all can see. Why did I fear darkness so much at the beginning? It is so easy to conceal oneself in it. Apparently all animals experience such subtle shame, fear and worriment and seek seclusion when they are changing their skin or hide.</p>
				<p>So, I am changing my skin? Ah, it is the same, worthless prattle! The whole trouble is that I have failed to escape <em>Maria’s</em> gaze and am, apparently preparing to close the last door, the door I guarded so well. But I am ashamed! I swear by eternal salvation, I feel ashamed, like a girl before the altar. I am almost blushing. Blushing Satan … no, quiet, quiet: <em>he</em> is not here! Quiet! …</p>
				<p>Magnus told her everything. She did not reiterate that she loves Me but looked at me and said:</p>
				<p>“Promise <em>me</em>, you will not kill yourself.”</p>
				<p>The <em>rest</em> was in her gaze. You remember how bright it is? But do not think that I hastily agreed. Like a salamander in the fire, I quickly changed colors. I shall not repeat to you all the flaming phrases I uttered: I have forgotten them. But you remember how bright and serene Maria’s gaze is? I kissed her hand and said humbly:</p>
				<p>“Madam! I do not ask you for forty days and a desert for contemplation: the desert I will find myself and a week is quite enough for me to think the matter over. But do give me a week and … please, don’t look at me any more … otherwise. …”</p>
				<p>No, that wasn’t what I said. I said it in other words, but it’s all the same. I am now changing my skin. It hurts me. I am frightened and ashamed because any crow might see me and come to pick my flesh. What use is there in the fact that there is a revolver in my pocket? It is only when you learn to hit yourself that you can hit a crow: crows know that and consequently do not fear tragically bulging pockets.</p>
				<p>Having become human and descended from above I have become but half a man. I entered upon this human existence as if into a strange element, but I have not lost myself in it entirely: I still cling with one hand to my Heaven and my eyes are still above the surface. But she commands me to accept man in his entirety: only he is a <em>man</em> who has said: never shall I kill myself, never shall I leave life of my own free will. And what about the whip? These cursed cuts upon my back? Pride?</p>
				<p>Oh, Maria, Maria, how terribly you tempt Me!</p>
				<p>I look into the past of this earth and serious myriads of tragic shadows floating slowly over climes and ages! Their hands stretch hopelessly into space, their bony ribs tear through the lean, thin skin, their eyes are filled with tears, and their sighs have dried up their throats. I see blood and madness, violence and falsehood, I hear their oaths, which they constantly betray, their prayers to God, in which, with every word of mercy and forgiveness, they curse their own earth. Wherever I look, I see the earth smoking in convulsion; no matter in which direction I strain my ear, I hear everywhere unceasing moans: or is the womb of the earth itself filled with moaning? I see a myriad cups about me, but no matter which of them my lips may touch, I find it filled with rust and vinegar: or has man no other drink? And this is <em>man</em>?</p>
				<p>I knew <em>them</em> before. I have seen <em>them</em> before. But I looked upon them as Augustus did from his box upon the galaxy of his victims: Ave, Caesar! These who are about to die salute you. And I looked upon them with the eyes of an eagle and my wise, belaureled head did not disdain to take notice of their groaning cries even with so much as a nod: they came and disappeared, they marched on in endless procession⁠—and endless was the indifference of my Caesar-like gaze. And now … is it really I who walks on so hastily, playing with the sand of the arena? And am I this dirty, emaciated, hungry slave who lifts his convict face into the air, yelling hoarsely into the indifferent eyes of Fate:</p>
				<p>“Ave, Caesar! Ave, Caesar!”</p>
				<p>I feel a sharp whip upon my back and with a cry of pain I fall to the ground. Is it some <em>Master</em> who is beating me? No, it is another <em>slave</em>, who has been ordered to whip a <em>slave</em>: very soon his knout will be in my hand and his back will be covered with blood and he will be chewing the sand, the sand which now grates between my teeth.</p>
				<p>Oh, Maria, Maria, how terribly you tempt Me!</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
