<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>March 2. Rome, Villa Orsini.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary-entry">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title se:diary.dateline">March 2.<br/>
				Rome, Villa Orsini.</h2>
			</header>
			<p>I pass my days in deep solitude. My earthly existence is beginning to trouble me. With every hour I seem to <em>forget</em> what I have left behind the wall of <em>human</em> things. My <em>eyesight</em> is weakening. I can hardly see behind that wall. The shadows behind it scarcely move and I can no longer distinguish their outline. With every second my sense of <em>hearing</em> grows duller. I hear the quiet squeak of a mouse, fussing beneath the floor but I am deaf to the thunders rolling above my head. The silence of delusion envelops me and I desperately strain my ears to catch the voices of frankness. I left them behind that impenetrable wall. With each moment <em>Truth</em> flees from Me. In vain my words try to overtake it: they merely shoot by. In vain I seek to surround it in the tight embraces of my thoughts and rivet it with chains: the prison disappears like air and my embraces envelop nothing but emptiness. Only yesterday it seemed to me that I had caught my prey. I imprisoned it and fastened it to the wall with a heavy chain, but when I came to view it in the morning—I found nothing but a shackled skeleton. The rusty chains dangled loosely from its neck while the skull was nodding to me in brazen laughter.</p>
			<p>You see, I am again seeking comparisons, only to have the <em>Truth</em> escape me! But what can I do when I have left all my weapons at <em>home</em> and must resort to your poor arsenal? Let God himself don this human form and He will immediately begin to speak to you in exquisite French or Yiddish and He will be unable to say <em>more</em> than it is possible to say in exquisite French or Yiddish. God! And I am only Satan, a modest, careless, human Devil!</p>
			<p>Of course, it was careless of me. But when I looked upon <em>your human</em> life from <em>beyond</em>...no, wait: You and I have just been caught in a lie, old man! When I said from <em>Beyond</em> you understood at once it must have been very far away. Yes? You may have already determined, perhaps, the approximate number of miles. Have you not at your disposal a limitless number of zeros? Ah, it is not true. My “<em>Beyond</em> ” is as close as your “<em>Here</em>, ” and is no further away than <em>this</em> very spot. You see what nonsense, what a lie you and I are pirouetting about! Cast away your meter and your scales and only listen as if behind your back there were no ticking of a clock and in your breast there were no counting machine. And so: when I looked upon your life from <em>Beyond</em> it appeared to Me a great and merry game of immortal fragments.</p>
			<p>Do you know what a puppets’ show is? When one doll breaks, its place is taken by another, but the play goes on. The music is not silenced, the auditors continue to applaud and it is all very interesting. Does the spectator concern himself about the fate of the fragments, thrust upon the scrap heap? He simply looks on in enjoyment. So it was with me, too. I heard the beat of the drums, and watched the antics of the clowns. And I so love immortal play that I felt like becoming an actor myself. Ah, I did not know then that it is not a <em>play</em> at all. And that the scrap heap was terrible when one becomes a puppet himself and that the broken fragments reeked with blood. You deceived me, my friend!</p>
			<p>But you are astonished. You knit your brow in contempt and ask: Who is this Satan who does not <em>know</em> such <em>simple</em> things? You are accustomed to respect the Devil. You listen to the commonest dog as if he were speaking ex cathedra. You have surrendered to me your last dollar as if I were a professor of white and black magic and suddenly I reveal myself an ignoramus in the most elementary matters! I understand your disappointment. I myself have grown to respect mediums and cards. I am ashamed to confess that I cannot perform a single trick or kill a bedbug by simply casting my eye upon it, but even with my finger. But what matters most to me is truth: Yes, I did not know your <em>simplest</em> things! Apparently the blame for this is for that <em>divide</em> which separates us. Just as you do not know <em>my</em> real Name and cannot pronounce a simple thing like that, so I did not know <em>yours</em>, my earthly shadow, and only now, in great ecstasy do I begin to grasp the wealth that is in you. Think of it: such a simple matter as counting I had to learn from Wondergood. I would not even be able to button my attire if it were not for the experienced and dexterous fingers of that fine chap Wondergood!</p>
			<p>Now I am human, like you. The limited sensation of my being I regard as my <em>knowledge</em> and with respect I now touch my own nose, when necessity arises: it is not merely a nose—it is an axiom! I am now myself a struggling doll in a theater of marionettes. My porcelain head moves to the right and to the left. My hands move up and down. I am merry, I am gay. I am at play. I know everything...except: whose hand it is that pulls the string behind Me. And in the distance I can see the scrap heap from which protrude two little feet clad in ball slippers....</p>
			<p>No, this is not the <em>play</em> of the <em>Immortal</em> that I sought. It no more resembles merriment than do the convulsions of an epileptic a good negro dance! Here any one is what he is and here every one seeks not to be what he is. And it is this endless process of fraud that I mistook for a merry theater: what a mistake, how silly it was of “almighty, immortal”...Satan! Here every one is dragging every one else to court: the living are dragging the dead, the dead—the living. The history of the former is the history of the latter. And God, too, is History! And this endless nonsense, this dirty stream of false witnesses, of perjurers, of false judges and false scoundrels I mistook for the <em>play</em> of immortals! Or have I landed in the <em>wrong</em> place? Tell Me, stranger: whither does <em>this</em> road lead? You are pale. Your trembling finger points in the direction of...ah, the scrap heap!</p>
			<p>Yesterday, I questioned Toppi about his former life, the first time he donned the human form: I wanted to know how a doll feels when its head is cracking and the thread which moves it is severed. We lit our pipes and with steins of beer before us, like two good Germans, we ventured into the realm of philosophy. It developed, however, that this numbskull has <em>forgotten</em> everything and my questions only confused him.</p>
			<p>“Is it possible that you have really forgotten everything, Toppi!”</p>
			<p>“Wait till you die and you will learn all about it yourself. I do not like to think of it. What good is it?”</p>
			<p>“Then it is not good?”</p>
			<p>“And have you ever heard of any one praising it?”</p>
			<p>“Quite true. No one has yet showered praises upon it.”</p>
			<p>“And no one will, I know!”</p>
			<p>We sat silent.</p>
			<p>“And do you remember, Toppi, whence you have come?”</p>
			<p>“From Illinois,—the same place you come from.”</p>
			<p>“No, I am speaking of <em>something else</em>. Do you remember whence you came? Do you recollect your real Name?”</p>
			<p>Toppi looked at me strangely, paled slightly and proceeded to clean his pipe. Then he arose and without lifting his eyes, said:</p>
			<p>“I beg you not to speak to me <em>thus</em>, Mr. Wondergood. I am an honest citizen of the United States and I do not understand your insinuations.”</p>
			<p>But he remembers. Not in vain did he grow pale. He is seeking to forget and will forget soon enough! This double play of earth and heaven is too much for him and he has surrendered entirely to the earth! There will come a time when he will take me off to an insane asylum or betray me to Cardinal X. if I dare to speak to him of Satan.</p>
			<p>“I respect you, Toppi. You are quite a man,” I said and kissed his brow: I always kiss the brow of people I love.</p>
			<p>Again I departed for the green Campagna desert: I follow the best models: when I am ill at ease I go into the desert. There I called for Satan and cursed his name but he would not answer me. I lay there long in the dust, pleading, when from somewhere in the depths of the desert I heard the muffled tread of feet, and a bright light helped Me to arise. And again I saw the Eden I had left behind, its green tents and unfading sunrise, its quiet lights upon the placid waters. And again I <em>heard</em> the silent murmurs of lips born of Immaculate Conception while toward my eyes I saw approaching Truth. And I stretched out my hands to Her and pleaded: Give me back my liberty!—</p>
			<p>“<em>Maria!</em> ”</p>
			<p>Who called: Maria? Satan again departed, the lights upon the placid waters were extinguished and Truth, frightened, disappeared—and again I sit upon the earth wearing my human form and gazing dully upon the painted world. And on my knees rested my shackled hands.</p>
			<p>“Maria!”</p>
			<p>...It is painful for me to admit that all this is really an invention: the coming of Satan with his “light and ringing step,” the gardens of Eden and my shackled hands. But I needed your attention and I could not get it without these gardens of Eden and these chains, the two extremes of your life. The gardens of Eden—how beautiful! Chains—how terrible! Moreover, all this talk is much more entertaining than merely squatting on a hill, cigar in one’s <em>free</em> hand, thinking lazily and yawning while awaiting the arrival of the chauffeur. And as far as <em>Maria</em> is concerned, I brought her into the situation because from afar I could see the black cypress trees above the Magnus home. An involuntary association of ideas...you understand.</p>
			<p>Can a man with such sight really see Satan? Can a person of such dull <em>ear</em> hear the so-called “murmurs” born of Immaculate Conception? Nonsense! And, please, I beg of you, call Me just Wondergood. Call me just Wondergood until the day when I crack my skull open with that plaything which opens the <em>most narrow</em> door into <em>limitless</em> space. Call me just Henry Wondergood, of Illinois: you will find that I will respond promptly and obligingly.</p>
			<p>But if, some day, you should find my head crushed, examine carefully its <em>fragments</em> : there, in red ink will be engraved the proud name of Satan! Bend thy head, in reverence and bow to him—but do not do me the honor of accompanying my fragments to the scrap heap: one should never bow so respectfully to chains cast off!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
